<heading>Introduction</heading>In this essay a review is given on the pedogenesis of the British Isles (excluding Ireland) in the time span from Neolithic to the Iron Age. The following chapter summarizes the development of Man in the British Isles and his influences on the vegetation. The next chapters describe the different major soil types of Britain and the impact of man on soils and vegetation for the two distinct regions of lowland and upland Britain. The last chapter gives a conclusion on pedogenesis on the British Isles with focus on vegetation for the relevant period of time. The distribution and extension of soils in Britain can be seen in the following figure. The structure of this essay refers to the approximate boundary of the highland zone. <figure/><heading>The British Isles from Neolithic times to the Iron Age</heading>Mesolithic Man had a largely animal product based diet, and agriculture was unknown. He possibly influenced the vegetation through planting of hazel (Corylus avellana), but did not cause major changes such as soil erosion. At the end of Mesolithic and beginning of Neolithic started the process of man made deforestation and the onset of agriculture. This more settled way of life was probably caused by an increase of the population and decrease of wild animal resources. Early Neolithic in 7,200 BP brought major woodland clearance which continued through the Bronze Age and later epochs (Evans 1993; Piggott 1981). Woodland clearing may have caused the ceasing of tufa formation in Southern England after about 6000-5000 BP (Evans 1993; Preece and Bridgeland 1998). On the European Continent similar development arose (Schmidtchen and Bork 2001). The spreading of farming practises over Europe happened from south-east to north-west from the beginning of the 9th millennium BP and reaching the Channel coasts of the continent by the middle or second half of the 5th millennium BP. All archaeological cultures involved were cultivating cereals (Triticum monococcum, T. dicoccum and  Hordeum hexastichon), using stones and raising domesticated animals (cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and dogs) in various proportions. Neolithic agricultural techniques and cultivated cereal species reached Ireland in 5750 BP before they came to Britain in 5300 BP. By 2500 BC agriculture was the dominant land use system in most of lowland Britain (Simmons 2001). The first tools for soil cultivation were the hoe and spade. The first evidence found for the usage of ardmarks were disturbed soil profiles detected at several sites (Wayland´s Smith in Berkshire c. 2820 bc; Horslip c. 3240 bc and South Street c. 2820 bc in Wiltshire and several others in that period) (Piggott 1981; Preece and Bridgeland 1998). The expansion of open habitat taxa such as plantain (Plantago lanceolata), grasses (Poaceae spp.) and dock (Rumex spp.) are indicating farming and grazing activities (Piggott 1981; Wiltshire and Edwards 1998). Neolithic man took influence on the tree cover not only through burning and felling trees, but also through feeding domesticated animals with leaves of lopped trees (Edwards 1993). Nevertheless, the Elm decline did not happen due to the activity of Man, but due to the spreading of a fungal disease with the coleoptera Scolytus scolytus as vector (Chambers 1993). The grazing in clearance sites was common and prevented woodland regeneration. Thus, clearance supported more bracken, grasses and on acid soil, heather. In the early Neolithic the human population was increasing strongly, supported by the favourable climate of West Zone F II and by good crop yields due to the colonisation of fertile new wood soils, ash fertilisation, the introduction of new crops with few pests and diseases and few competition through weeds. In the mid Neolithic the climate changed from West Zone F II (Atlantic) to F III (Sub-boreal), which led the population of England face less pleasant conditions. This caused a significant decrease of the population. Evidence is given for the abandonment of stony upland soil fields due to reduced fertility, erosion and leaching effects caused by increased precipitation (Favies Mortlock, Boardmanal. 1997). By that time the mixed Oak forest of the climatic optimum of the Atlantic phase had been in part cleared (Wiltshire and Edwards 1998). Soil fertility losses through erosion may have led to the introduction of manuring fields from the second millennium BC onwards (Fowler 1981). In the late Neolithic the population stabilized again, and food production took place on mixed farming systems. In this period many aspects of our present landscape have their origin. Increasing animal husbandry caused the introduction of continental European weed species such as Arcticum spp., but also the grassland vegetation of the present was formed. This vegetation is highly adapted to either animal based selection in pasture grassland or selection by the type and frequency of mowing for hay as winter fodder in meadows. The invention of the sickle was the major step for the creation of meadows. <heading>Changes in Bronze Age (1700-500 BC)</heading>The technique of bronze smelting was brought to the British Isles at the beginning of the Bronze Age. In the first millennium BC rye (Secale cereale) and oats (Avena spp.) were introduced to Britain, and Agropyron repens came in as a weed (Simmons 2001), although other authors disagree with this. The climatic changes in mid and late Neolithic and worsening conditions of soil erosion and fertility forced many settlers of upland areas to give up their settlements. The wheat growing areas were restricted to Southern and Eastern England, while barley was the predominant cereal crop of the highlands. Apart from barley cultivation animal husbandry dominated the climatically rougher parts of the British Isles. <heading>Changes in Iron Age (500-55 BC)</heading>Iron Age technology came to Britain in the seventh or sixth century BC, probably by Celtic tribes. A shift from non-permanent to permanent, enclosed settlements on hill tops preceded the new technology. The iron plough replaced the stone ard, which worked by tearing open the top soil, now leading to a turning of the top soil. This led to working on heavier clay soils for the first time, and to strip ploughing with its characteristic ridge and furrow pattern of the fields. A wide range of new crop plants was introduced, among them flax (Linum usitatissimum) and new wheat species. Beech and hornbeam increased in the south (Fowler 1981). <heading>Relevant soil groups</heading><heading>Podzol</heading>The podzol group is characterized by eluviation of humus and/or sesquioxides into the lower B horizon (see Figure 2). The organic O horizon covers a grey Ea horizon depleted from free iron. All free iron is translocated into the B horizon. Above the iron accumulation a dark humus rich layer is accumulated (the Bh). The most important characteristic of many podzols however is a strong brown or rusty coloured iron/aluminium rich Bs horizon. Peaty gleyed podzols have a layer of peat above the Eag. Underneath comes a thin iron pan (Bi), which builds a barrier to roots and water, leading to vegetative mat formation on the surface. Podzolisation denotes a change in land use from a forest/arable land use to seasonal pastoral activities associated with deteriorating pastures and heather scrub. It is a common feature in British soils. A literature survey of C 14 dates reveals that it happened largely in post Neolithic times in Northern Europe on different former brown earth forest soil sites (Webley 1978). <figure/><heading>Brown earths</heading>Brown earths drain more or less freely. They contain no free calcium carbonate, redistributed iron, aluminium and organic matter. Weathering causes brown colour due to formation of hydrated iron oxides. Brown earths of the upland have a low base status. Surface water gley soils have a water blocking C horizon, and show grey mottled areas with reddish brown iron-manganese concretions, see Figure 3 <figure/><heading>Calcareous soils</heading>Calcareous soils retain calcium carbonate throughout the profile although leaching occurs under British precipitation conditions. Three broad categories can be distinguished: Rendzina, brown calcareous soil and gleyed calcareous soil. Rendzina soils are commonly found on chalk material and limestone. These are free draining shallow soils which consist of a dark organic A horizon which sits directly on weathering limestone, the C horizon. The brown calcareous soils are more common, they show an A horizon which leads into a brown or reddish brown calcareous B horizon. The red colour comes from ferric oxides in clay particles. The pH ranges from neutral to slightly alkaline. Gleyed calcareous soils are mostly derived from highly calcareous clay and shale. They are not freely draining, normally deep and coarse structured. The A horizon is fairly dark, the B horizon often mottled with yellow-brown and grey, and the C horizon has a grey gleyed structure with carbonate concretions. <heading>Organic soils</heading>Soils originating from fens, mires and bogs are described with organic soils. Peat formation is influenced by the water source (groundwater/precipitation), temperature, the trophy status and topography of the landscape (Courtney, Curtisal. 1976), see also the chapter on Upland Britain. <heading>Lowland Britain</heading>Most of the British lowland terrain was covered by deciduous forest prior to Neolithic times, which favoured a nutrient recycling process and resulted in little decline in base content. These soils were mainly brown earths on well-drained sites and gley soils on badly or slow drained sites (Courtney, Curtis, Trudgill 1976). The woodland clearance and burning of Neolithic and later times led to an initial increase of plant nutrients through ash fertilisation and high turnover of organic matter due to ploughing and soil aeration. But the burning caused as much as 70% loss of vegetation bound Nitrogen, Sulphur and Phospor into the atmosphere. This nutrient boost was used up within a couple of years. Subsequent land use practices led to nutrient losses. Nutrient export (particularly Nitrogen and Phosphor) took mainly place due to grazing combined with stable/kraal husbandry, hay making without fertilizing and crop harvesting. Leaching, the loss of water-soluble soil components due to precipitation occurred and caused decalcification and further loss of nutrients. Run-off was also happening in winter, when precipitation was high and fields lay bare. As much as 50% vertical losses of Potassium, Magnesium and Calcium can occur. <heading>Chalk parent material</heading>The distribution of chalk parent material can be seen in Figure 4: Chalk is a freely draining material due to small fissures in the rock and initially very calcareous. The initially high proportion of calcium carbonate from chalk derived soils in humid Britain however is slowly washed out. This leaves a non-calcareous clayey material, the brown earths. Nevertheless, a large part of the British solid chalk outcrop was covered by superficial deposits such as loess, clay-with-flints, Plateau drift and Coombe deposits and therefore does not carry brown earth. <figure/>The present Chalk grassland is created and maintained by sheep grazing. Evans (1993) summarizes the history of the English chalklands under human influence. The prehistoric development happened in the following way: Woodland clearance started in the early Neolithic. In the later Neolithic land abandonment period the vegetation regenerated in different ways: Steep slopes developed into scrub woodland and woodland, remaining calcareous due to instable conditions and soil creep River valley bottoms showed a development towards dry grassland, decalcification, and following paludification and alluviation Forest regeneration on flat, level areas did not happen; stable and short-tufted impoverished grassland developed there. The soils became decalcified in these sites. This phenomenon is probably related to a decrease in edaphic activity due to covering of the surface with a dense thatch of grass under extensive grazing conditions, as shown in Figure 5. <figure/>Soil stripping was used to a large extent when huge earthworks were constructed. This opening of the landscape brought new elements of vegetation into its current place, e.g. terricolous lichen colonies (Gilbert 2000). In the Bronze and Iron Age grassland was widespread. Woodland regeneration did not take place on any larger scale. The landscape we know from the region did not undergo mayor changes anymore (Evans 1993). <heading>Limestone parent material</heading>A band of Jurassic limestone exceeds from north Somerset to Yorkshire. Soil formation here is fairly similar in comparison with soils of the chalk downlands, with the difference that limestone is harder and weathering thus happens slower. Soils from weathered limestone are made up of calcareous and non-calcareous clays, and oolitic and sandy limestones. In regard to the impact of early Man on soils and vegetation similar processes as in the chalk downlands have happened here. For these reasons it is not dealt with in any further detail. <heading>Superficial deposits: Loess and coversands</heading>In the late Quaternary some parts of southern England were covered by loess and coversands (ANTOINE, CATTal. 2003). On the European continent this was and still is the preferred soil type for agriculture, e.g. the Neolithic Bandkeramik culture was the first culture to practice agriculture in the deep loess soils of Germany (Ellenberg 1982; Körber-Grohne 1995; Lang, Nilleral. 2003). The loess cover of England has weathered and transferred to the non-calcareous fraction of most soils on the chalklands (Courtney, Curtisal. 1976). Large parts of it were eroded after woodland clearance and agricultural practices in pre-historical and historical times. In a computer simulation (Favies Mortlock, Boardmanal. 1997) have elaborated an initial condition of loess cover thickness of c. 1.2 m at around 7000 BP which became gradually eroded in the period from between 4000 BP to 1800 BP due to intensifying agricultural practice. <figure/><heading>Superficial deposits: Clay-with-flints</heading>This typically yellowish-red clay and large flint containing material is covering south-central and south-eastern English upland slopes and plateaus. This heavy soil was hardly suitable for pre-historic agriculture and therefore was used as grazing land. Flints show a wide range of pH reactions. When first exposed, an alkaline surface reaction happens. With aging they provide an acidic habitat in the generally alkaline chalk environment. <heading>Superficial deposits: Coombe deposits</heading>These are deposits such as alluvial fans in valley floors from the late glacial. They contain a mixture of compact gravel with flints and lumps of chalk surrounded by fine chalk and silt particles. They partly originate from erosion deposits after woodland clearance and thus are Man made. <heading>Soils of the clay and marl lowlands</heading>Due to its fine particle size and denudation processes clay tends to form lowland landscapes where water collects easily. Small sized particles have small diameter pore spaces which tend to block vertical water movement. This often causes water logging. The occurring anaerobic conditions cause the reduction of mainly iron, and gley formation takes place. (Courtney, Curtisal. 1976). <heading>Upland Britain</heading>The Man made deforestation mentioned in the previous chapters also happened in upland Britain. The climate in these- in their soil morphology more diverse regions- however is influencing soils in a different ways. Due to increasing altitude an increased precipitation occurs, with increased quantity, frequency and duration compared to lowland Britain. Side effects are less solar radiation due to cloud cover, lower mean temperature and stronger winds. These conditions shorten the length of growing season for agricultural crops, thus forcing Neolithic and present day Man to make land use predominantly in form of pasture and livestock cultivation, and if cereals are grown it is mainly barley. The described conditions influence British upland soils stronger than the lowland soils, which nevertheless are also affected in similar ways. The effects on soils are: <list>A high leaching factorWaterlogging occurs frequently on bad or slow draining soilsReduction of biological activity and slower breakdown of organic matterAccumulation of L and F horizons due to plant debris litterFormation of organic mor horizons and peatPeriodic dessication due to strong winds, especially on shallow and south facing soilsIncreased likeliness of frost and its effects on vegetation and soil formation</list>Archaeological surveys underneath Bronze Age barrows have revealed that prior to the Bronze Age upland soils were essentially brown earths or gleyed brown earths. The soil was not podzolised, indicating that podzolisation happened later (Courtney, Curtisal. 1976). Pollen analysis also indicates that prior to the Bronze Age the vegetation was deciduous forest, and the nowadays dominating heather vegetation has developed in post-bronze age times. An acidifying process took place under the heather vegetation, combined with a loss of soil structure and destruction of nutrients in organic horizons caused by burning. This led to soil deterioration and the search for new and virgin forest soils. <heading>Moorland</heading>Many of today's lowland heaths and upland plateaux were developing from brown earth soil which became podzolised and/or gleyed because of overexploitation in the early second millennium BC. Peat formation requires a waterlogged habitat which suppresses microbial decomposition so that the built-up of organic material exceeds the rate of litter composition. The required climate for the formation of blanket mire is thus one with a high precipitation/evaporation ratio. Moore (1993) suggests that the deforestation caused by prehistoric Man have caused blanket mire formation in Britain and Europe to a large extent. The sub-boreal climate of West zone F III was leading to growth of blanket peat by the end of the Bronze Age at about 760-710 BC (BARBER and DMITRI 1999). A distinct Grenzhorizont was found as evidence for this climatic change. Much evidence was found to believe that woodland clearing was the cause that led to the development of blanket mire formation in the British Isles as well as on the continent (Moore 1993). <heading>Conclusion</heading>Present British soils are largely influenced by human activities in their succession. The clearance of woodland caused without doubt the greatest environmental change of prehistoric times. The process of leaching, decarbonisation and podzolisation is a natural process in regions with high precipitation, but prehistoric wood clearance has increased the speed of transformation and expansion in all parts of the British Isles and large parts of Europe. The present types of present vegetation communities have their origin in prehistoric times: Most open habitat vegetation communities were formed or began to develop then, e.g. chalk grasslands, heath, raised bogs or moor. Excepted from this development were the glacial tundra vegetation, bare rock areas and other for human activities not appropriate locations. Due to in the Neolithic "invented" land use forms plant communities such as the meadows, pastures and rural flora communities have evolved. They heavily depend on the land use system, e.g. regular cuts in meadows, soil compaction and food selection of livestock in pasture, ploughing and fallow in field systems, heathland management with fire. For the selection of settlement areas the role of loess deposits was less important than in continental Europe, due to the comparably small extension of loess deposits. The current woodland types of Europe were also selected by human activities, see Figure 7. <figure/>