<heading>Introduction</heading>This essay aims on comparing two ancient oasis settlements of Oman in regard to their sustainability and land use management over the millennia. The irrigation infrastructure needed for any agricultural production in this xeric environment is based on aini-aflaj (sing. falaj) systems, referring to canals that convey water from a spring at the foot of a mountain to agricultural fields (Siebert, Häseral. 2005). A research project was carried out by an international and interdisciplinary research team of agronomists, archaeologists and urban planners of the Sultan Quaboos University, Oman and German universities in the period from 2000 to 2005. The agronomic part of the research project was focusing on the following questions: Due to the erratic and scarce nature of precipitation in the area of study, genesis and survival of these oases very much depends on the existence of large and well buffered natural resources of water. How is this established and maintained? The irrigation system and soil properties of these Omani oases are established in a way that salinisation of the terrace soils is avoided even under intensive and long utilisation. How could these agriculturally intensive oasis systems stay productive for millennia with only a moderate build-up of toxic salt levels despite extremely xeric moisture regimes? Are the mountain oases of Oman sinks for the plant nutrients Nitrogen (N), Phospor (P) and Potassium (K)? Which role does the transfer of animal excrements from the surrounding areas to the fields play? To what extent does Medicago sativa contribute to the N-supply of fields? <heading>Location and history of the oases</heading><heading>Balad Seet</heading>Located in the northern mountains of Oman, the Wadi Bani Awf with its head oasis Balad Seet at 57.39° eastern longitude and 23.19° northern latitude and a height of between 950 and 1020 m is the first area of study. Balad Seet is a typical core oasis with 13.6 ha of potentially irrigated agricultural area. 8.8 ha are planted with palm groves, mainly Phoenix dactylifera, and 4.6 ha are planted with seasonal crops. <figure/>The settlement history of Balad Seet started in the Iron Age II period (1100-900 BC) when a small village was established. As early as in the first half of the first millennium BC, settlers from the nearby Al-Hamra might have brought with them the innovative falaj system. The next larger step in the settlement of Balad Seet has taken place sometime in the Early Islamic period (630-1055 AD) and was apparently characterized by a large expansion of the cropping and housing area. From this period onwards steady modifications of the aflaj system resulted in growing quantities of agricultural crops, increasing the village's total amount of cropland by 137% and of date palm groves by 105%. It appears as if the cropping area steadily increased between 900 BC and 1930 AD and declined again only after the western terraces of 2.5 ha size had been abandoned in the 1930s (Nagieb, J.al. 2004). <figure/><heading>Maqta</heading>The second area of study is the Wadi Khabbah with Maqta as head oasis at 59.00° eastern longitude and 22.83° northern latitude and a height of 1050 m. Maqta has a typical scattered oasis pattern with fields distributed and embedded in the countryside. The agricultural terrace system comprises of 4.4 ha, while 3.6 ha of this area is planted with date palms. Only 0.8 ha of the area is used for non-perennial crop planting, and the average field size is 21.3 m 2. Maqta is situated just below some recently discovered 5000 year old monumental tower tombs (Siebert, Häseral. 2005). At Maqta the first pollen findings from agricultural crops other than (perhaps not domesticated) cereal spp. date back to the first millennia AD. The area however shows evidence of prior human activities due to the recently discovered, 5000 year old monumental tower tombs of the Shir plateau in close vicinity of today Maqta oasis. A pastoral and transhumant way of life was the supposed land use system in the pre-agricultural period. The results of analysing a four meter deep soil pit revealed that in the Maqta area erosion and sedimentation after occasional rainfall are a millennia-old phenomenon. The pollen profile and molluscan analysis results do not show any evidence for major climate changes over the last 6500 years (Siebert, Häseral. 2005). <table/><heading>Sustainability of the oases</heading><heading>Hydrology</heading>For answering the first question monthly flow measurements of all springs at Balad Seet were made between November 2000 and April 2003. Additionally daily precipitation data were collected to observe the response of spring flow to rainfall. In November 2002 and January 2003 selected springs in Balad Seet and Hat were sampled to determine the age of the stored water through its tritium/3helium ratio and concentration of the anthropogenic trace gases sulphurhexafluoride (SF 6) and chlorfluorcarbohydrates (CFC). The purpose of these water measurements was to show the relative importance of the different aflaj as water sources and the flexibility of their water flow during the extended period of drought experienced during the measurement period. Given the constancy of the geological properties of the springs' parent rocks, insights into the resilience of the water supply are an important basis for subsequent hypotheses about any pre-historic settlement of the oasis system under study. <figure/>Relative flow of the four major aflaj and rainfall at Balad Seet. Flow rates were set to 100 at the onset of the measurement period on 15. November 2000. No rainfall measurements were taken before January 2001. <figure/>Results show that Balad Seet has a total annual water amount of 228600 m 3 or 17060m 3 ha -1, which is much more than that of Maqta with 51666 m 3 or 9936 m 3 ha -1. Water age measurements revealed that due to its geological properties of the aquifer Balad Seet water delivery is independent from drought periods for up to 5 years. Maqta in contrast has a different geological setting, thus making agriculture much more dependent on regular rainfalls due to lower storage capacities of the rocks. This might be a key factor for the earlier colonisation and larger population of Balad Seet. Nevertheless an in-depth survey on Maqta water supply is needed to give more detailed information. <heading>Soil properties</heading>At Balad Seet a soil profile was dug and soil chemical and physical properties were measured. It revealed that the terrace soils are all man-made, built of fine silty wadi sediments and coarse rocks. Over the centuries as much as 100 000 t of this material has been transported with simple tools to build these terraces.The combination of a low bulk density, a stable pore structure, a high pore volume and a regular pore structure with well-balanced micro-(storage) and macro(drainage)-pores is characteristic for the first meter of profile depth at the lower part of the Mazra terrace system, planted with annual crops. Deeper soil layers consist of gravel and rock. <figure/>The particle size distribution of the terrace profiles, the high quality of the irrigation water with its high calcium carbonate concentration and high soil organic matter due to intensive manure application all contribute to the avoidance of salinisation in the crop rooting zone over millennia. These factors contribute to rapid drainage of the soil profile and thereby help to wash out salt. The electrical conductivity in the rooting zone is with 1.1 dS m -1 (0-0.45m) fairly low and only increases to 4.8 dS m -1 in deeper layers (0.45-1.0m) (Luedeling, Nagiebal. 2005). At Maqta a similar but shallower soil profile was found. The agricultural focus here is mainly on palm groves, and only 0.8 ha are potentially planted with annual crops. The date palm is one of the most salt tolerant crops, and thus low salt levels in soils are not as crucial as for annual crops. <heading>Partial nutrient balance</heading>A partial oasis balance was established for Balad Seet and Maqta, analyzing annual inputs, outputs and balances of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P) and potassium (K) in cropland and palms groves. All data are given as amounts per unit area and as totals for each land use system and represent averages of a 2 year measurement period for Balad Seet. For Maqta data show a one year average. <table/><table/>The balances reveal that all analysed nutrients are in a surplus, which confirms the initial hypothesis that both oases are sinks for the most important plant nutrients (Buerkert, Nagiebal. 2005). Surplus shown for Balad Seet mainly result from a high amount of applied mineral and organic fertilizer. Compared to nutrient concentrations of manure from the Sahel zone the nutrient concentration in this case reflects external inputs such as purchased animal fodder and fish meal as supplementary fodder. Maqta shows the typical pattern of a small scattered oasis with a high percentage of fallow or abandoned fields. Fertilisation here relies entirely on manure, which reflects the strong agro-pastoral land use system. In comparison to Balad Seet nutrient surplus was about 55-74 % lower. Alfalfa plays an important role in Omani oases. Optimal growing conditions for alfalfa (high radiation, high day and relatively cool night temperatures, regular irrigation, high fertility soils) allow an annual dry matter production of 22 000 kg ha -1 year -1 with 12 cuts per year. These dry matter yields are 2-3 times higher as published yields for example in the USA. Concerning the annual N 2-fixation first calculations resulted in a fixation rate of 69-85%. Different results are reflected from other experiments and authors. The measured 478 kg N ha -1 year -1 in the Balad Seet alfalfa stem (Wichern, Luedelingal. 2004) is considerably higher as that of 90-340 kg N ha -1 year -1 published by (Keller, Hanusal. 1999). The application of manure compost, crop residues and human faeces on the heavily irrigated oasis soils of Balad Seet allowed a constant built-up of humus and thus a stable agricultural production over long periods of time. Currently about 6000 - 12000 kg ha -1 year -1 manure compost are applied, they provide 24 - 48 kg N ha -1 year -1 and high amounts of organic C, leading to a narrow C/N-ratio of 10.8 in the upper 0.2 m of the soil profile. This makes long time storage of additional amounts of N in soil microbial biomass unlikely, thus loss of N through leaching and evaporation are likely to occur (Wichern, Mülleral. 2004). <heading>Seasonal distribution of crops </heading>At Balad Seet the analysis of the land use pattern across the year (winter compared to summer months) shows a characteristic fluctuation of used and unused plots. In the cooler winter months, the fallow rate is only 15-20% and a larger diversity of crops is maintained compared to the summer months, when the total proportion of fallow plots is 50-70% and more drought-tolerant crops such as sorghum are planted. This strategy and the spacing of palm groves next to aflaj outflows make sure that the palm groves are supplied first with water around the year, while annual crops are planted according to water availability. The backbone of the oasis is the date palm, and water and nutrient input is given to the palm groves first. Two previously unknown varieties of Triticum dicoccon were found in the two oases, both reaching high prices at local markets and being attributed with medicinal qualities (Hammer, Filatenkoal. 2004). <figure/><heading>Conclusion</heading>The geomorphologic setting of Balad Seet provides a reliable and well-buffered water supply necessary for intensive irrigated year-round date and crop cultivation. Maqta water supply is less well buffered; this is reflected by a different land use system with focus on agro pastoralism and to a lesser extent date palm production. The man-made terrace soils of the oases are built up in a way that salinisation is avoided. Salt built-up is prevented by a particle size distribution favouring drainage, high levels of soil organic carbon providing good soil structure and a high irrigation water quality. The oases in fact are large temporary sinks for nutrients until they are lost through leaching or evaporation into the atmosphere. Both oases depend on a nutrient supply delivered through animal manure. At Balad Seet the influence of external inputs is reflected in the nutrient balance. The amount of biomass and nitrogen provided through N 2-fixation of alfalfa is exceptionally high due to optimal growing conditions. Maqta still is relatively untouched by modern life, and reflected by its nutrient balance external inputs seem to be low. Oasis agriculture in Oman has an ancient history but given the rapid transformation of this country's economy heavily influenced by petroleum exploitation since the 1970s it is rapidly changing in structure and extent. Hundreds of traditional aflaj-based settlements have been abandoned since and a millennia-old mode of life with its cultural and genetic resources is threatened by extinction. Whether these systems can withstand the challenges posed by overpopulation, rapidly raising labour costs and the heavy use of mineral fertilizers instead of manure has to be seen in the future. 