There are 2 main pathogenic microorganisms of concern Listeria Monocytogenes and  Clostridium botulinum. C. botulinum only grows under anaerobic conditions. A pathogen modelling programme was used to assess the relative risk from each under different conditions and my findings follow. <heading>MODEL TESTING CONDITIONS </heading><list>Assumptions: Initial Contamination Level: 1 cfu g -1Time to level of concern: ≥10 days Concern level ( level which should not be exceeded ): 10 3 cfu g -1Conditions considered: Anaerobic and Aerobic conditions </list><heading>RESULTS </heading><heading>STAGE 1: Investigation of possible growth of Listeria monocytogenes</heading>Assuming the salmon contains 3.8. % (w/w) Sodium chloride has a mean pH value of 6.2, at 5°C; Under aerobic conditions at level of concern is not reached in 10 days. 2.97 cfu/g predicted. Under anaerobic conditions the level of concern is reached in less than 10 days; between 8 and 8.5 days. Next the effect of varying conditions 'The worst case scenario' was considered i.e. If temperature abuse occurred and samples were transported at 25 °C, pH was increased (made more alkaline) or salt concentration reduced. 4 alternative appropriate conditions were selected based on this. <heading>STAGE 2: Stage 2: Investigation of possible growth of Clostridium botulinum</heading>(Inhibiting Listeria monocytogenes and Clostridium botulinum) The 4 conditions, listed below, were considered appropriate for limiting Listeria monocytogenes growth were then used to predict growth of Clostridium botulinum. The programme gives values for the probability of microorganisms growing above the level of concern and also an estimate of the number of days in which this will occur. <table/>The 2 Conditions which resulted in acceptable levels of microorganisms i.e. lower than the concern levels in the delivery time 10 days are highlighted and are my suggestions for conditions that should be maintained to prevent growth of bacteria or toxin formation. The following are therefore the most acceptable conditions for storage and delivery are therefore: <table/>Although the conditions 2 and 3 have been rejected they were tested under worst case scenario conditions and might be useful but only after carrying out storage tests to ensure it is safe .This is because there is a high probability of microbial growth after a short time and dangerous spore levels are reached very quickly, However, if temperatures of 5°C or below were maintained this would significantly reduce risk. Finally, in answer to your questions: Would it be acceptable to post the salmon in a simple lined, cardboard box? No. You would need some form of insulated packaging. What conditions during transit would be required in order to ensure the delivery of a safe product with an adequate (5d) storage life at 5°C by the consumer before consumption? To begin with, the fish should have low spore and bacterial counts, have the right salt concentration, and be at the prescribed pH range. Temperature of 5ºC or less should be maintained for both alternatives. This should be checked and recorded (using calibrated instruments) by the transporter and retailer of your product to assure the customer the correct conditions have been maintained. Any irregularities should be reported  Is vacuum packing desirable? No, C. botulinum only grows in anaerobic conditions and anaerobic conditions enhance growth L. monocytogenes. I it would be advisable to pack them in packs with modified atmosphere (higher concentration of carbon dioxide than normal if possible e.g. 60% CO 2, 40%Nitrogen). Alternatively you may consider smoking the salmon and then vacuum packing it. This would allow you to mail order the salmon to your customers. Risks of Clostridium botulinum poisoning are acceptable for the two recommended conditions but unacceptable for the other two. 'Acceptable' means poisoning could occur but all reasonable measures would have been taken to avoid it by providing unfavourable growth conditions. Zero is not achievable without sterilization. Please contact me if you have any further questions. Sincerely,  