<heading>I) Introduction</heading>Learning a foreign language is a complex process affected by an infinite number of variables and conditions. Consequently, a number of theories and methods have emerged in order to account for this multifaceted nature of foreign language learning. The aim of this essay is to illustrate how theories of second language learning and teaching applied or not in my short experience of learning Persian. As far as I am concerned, the lack of motivation, comprehensible input and negotiated output were the most crucial factors that impeded my progress in learning Persian. Thus, through a brief analysis of the learning strategies that I employed in order to approach this daunting task, the errors that I made and the theories behind them I will present how the lack of these three factors affected my progress in the learning process. <heading>II) Attitude and Motivation towards Persian</heading><heading>Affective Filter Hypothesis</heading>Initially, I have to admit that my feelings towards the whole process of learning Persian were rather negative. I considered Persian to be a completely different language from my mother tongue (Greek) and from English. As a result, I equated difference with difficulty and became negatively predisposed. I expected to find the whole process very difficult to cope with. Moreover, the fact that I was going to work on the language by myself without explicit instruction did not appeal to me and was in contrast to my learning preferences. Thus, the fact that I was not used to working on a foreign language without being under the immediate control of the teacher and without receiving constant feedback made me feel much stressed about the task. What is more, the limited amount of time along with the task of applying the principles of the various theories to my learning experience made the whole process seem even more daunting. Consequently, according to Krashen's theory my affective filter was high and impeded my learning of the Persian language. The Affective Filter Hypothesis, part of the Input Hypothesis that will be analysed later, states as Krashen holds (1985:3) that the affective filter "...is a mental block that prevents acquirers from fully utilizing the comprehensible input they receive for language acquisition". Krashen supports that when the filter is up then the learner's capacity of acquiring a language from the available input is limited whereas when it is down the learning process is facilitated. Whether the filter will be low or high depends on a variety of variables that affect the learning process. Krashen (1982:31) divides them into three categories: those that have to do with learners' motives and needs, those that depict the learners' self-image and attitude towards the language and thirdly those which are concerned with the learners' emotional state. Consequently, when a learner feels unmotivated and experiences uncertainty and anxiety, the affective filter will be up and will stand as a barrier to the available input. On the contrary, when the learner is motivated, self-confident and relaxed, the input processing will be facilitated. Nevertheless, despite my negative attitude towards the language, I have to admit that the whole process seemed to be an interesting challenge since I have not tried to learn a new language apart from English for many years and since I was not used to working by myself. Thus, I was quite engrossed in seeing how I would respond to this unknown learning situation. <heading>Motivation Theory</heading>Another factor which affected the learning process was that I entertained no motivation for the language apart from the completion of the assignment. The fact that I had no real-life purpose or any communicative needs to fulfil, apart from a practical goal, limited my desire to acquire the language. As Brown (1994:152) argues "Motivation is commonly thought of as an inner drive, impulse, emotion, or desire that moves one to a particular action". Thus, generally speaking, motivation is the internal drive which pushes people towards the achievement of a particular goal. Although motivation is a quite intricate concept, it is a common belief that the more value the individual places in the completion of the goal, the stronger his motivation will be. A concept which is of paramount importance according to Gardner (1985), cited in Dörnyei (2001:48), is the relationship between motivation and orientation, the latter being the direction the motivation follows. He distinguishes between integrative and instrumental orientation. The former is concerned with the desire of a learner to become assimilated in the target-language culture whereas the latter has to do with the wish to accomplish a practical goal. Another distinction which is perhaps more useful for language learning, because it can be more easily identified and manipulated by teachers, is that of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. As Brown (1994:155-6) quotes Deci (1975:23), intrinsic motivation derives from the learner's enjoyment of the learning process whereas extrinsic comes from external factors, the need, for instance, to pass an exam or to achieve a financial reward. Most researchers consider integrative and internal motivation to be of higher significance and to promote language learning the best. As Maslow argues (1970), cited in Brown (1994:156), people strive more for self-recognition and peer-approval than for any kind of external incentive. On the contrary, the motivation that I entertained could be identified as instrumental and extrinsic because my wish to learn the language was for the purposes of study. Consequently, it is apparent that there is a strong correlation between motivation and success. But one aspect of the motivation theory that has not been sufficiently clarified yet is the difficulty to discern whether motivation leads to success or success is something which promotes further motivation. Skehan (1989), cited in Lightbown and Spada (1999:56), supports "...the question is, are learners more highly motivated because they are successful, or are they successful because they are highly motivated?" According to my personal experience of learning Persian, I started to feel more interested and involved in the learning process when I noticed the first steps of progress whereas I felt reluctant to continue when things became blurred in my mind. <heading>III) The Importance of Errors and the Theories behind Them</heading><heading>A) A Brief Description of the Learning Strategy</heading>To begin with, I initiated the learning process by listening first to the sounds from the cassette. I noticed that the correspondence between letters and sounds was relatively easy. More specifically, some sounds were similar to my mother tongue's so it was easy for me to pronounce them. Nevertheless, I practiced and repeated the sounds orally plenty of times in order to get used to the Persian pronunciation. As far as the book is concerned, I preferred not to follow the original order of the lesson presented. I practised first the unknown vocabulary, then the grammar and at last I read the dialogues. In order to learn the vocabulary, I repeated and wrote down the words with their translation many times. I tried to group them into categories, for example family relations and hours of the day, and to make associations with my native language and with English. The most helpful strategy that facilitated the learning of the vocabulary was to practice words not in isolation but in context embedded in sentences with other already known lexical items. Unfortunately, I found out that I had great difficulty in keeping the sounds of the words alive into my memory. On the contrary, it was easier to remember the meaning of words when I saw them in written form. Regarding grammar, I followed the same technique. I practised and wrote down many times the various grammatical forms. But, I noticed that I could hardly produce a grammatical sentence of four or five words together in combination even if I pondered on it for a long time. Consequently, I performed a great variety of errors that I will analyse, along with the theories behind them. <heading>B) The Analysis of Errors </heading>If we look back in time, we will find a rather different view of foreign language learner's errors from the way contemporary researchers perceive them. Errors were considered to be an inevitable and annoying part of the learning process that should be immediately corrected so as not to impede the learning progress. Contrary to this belief, Corder was one of the first researchers who appreciated the real value of errors in understanding the foreign language learning processes. First of all, Corder (1967:24) highlighted the distinction between mistakes and errors. Mistakes, which are non-systematic, occur due to slips of the tongue or memory lapses and reflect our linguistic performance of a language. On the contrary, errors are systematic, reflect our linguistic competence and are of high significance for they provide important evidence of the students' learning strategies. Corder (1967:25) points out that only systematic errors can give insight to learners' underlying knowledge of the target language, which he calls transitional competence. One of the major theories in the field of error analysis was Contrastive Analysis Hypothesis (CAH) which originated from the behaviouristic approach. Behaviourism views language learning as the formation of new habits. This means that when a learner is tackling a new linguistic system, he has to overcome the past habits of his native language. As Gass and Selinker argue (2001:71) in CAH "The role of the native language, then, took on great significance, because it was the major cause for luck of success in learning the L2". One of the key concepts in CAH was the notion of transfer. Learners were expected to transfer elements from their L1 to the target language. Lado (1957) holds, cited in Johnson (2001:60), that we can predict which linguistic items will be difficult for the learners by comparing L1 with L2. Similar areas will denote ease of acquisition due to L1 transfer to L2 whereas difference in linguistic structures will denote difficulty due to mother-tongue interference. CAH found application in my attempt to imitate the Persian pronunciation where it was difficult to get rid of my native accent. At the same time, I had little trouble in producing the /x/ sound as in /xāhar/ due to L1 transfer. Moreover, the plural form "somā" of the second person singular "to" which is used to express politeness was familiar to me because this form exists in Greek, as well. The same thing applied in the fact that Persian pluralizes the adjectives just as Greek do. It is clear that learners will rely on their previous knowledge of a language in order to facilitate the foreign language learning process. Nevertheless, there is a great variety of errors that cannot be attributed to mother tongue interference. For instance, I noticed that I found much easier to use the "ezāfe" form to express possession in Persian (telefon-e-to=your phone) instead of the inflections at the end of the noun (telefonet=your phone) which resembles more the way my native language signifies possession. Moreover, because I have learned first to form the negation of the verb "nistam nisti..." which means "I am not, you are not..." I made the false generalisation that all verbs form the negation by adding the prefix "ni". Thus, I tended to produce the incorrect forms of the verb "I do not have" "nidāram*, nidāri*..." instead of "nadāram, nadāri..." and "nimidunam*, nimiduni*..." instead of nemidunam, nemiduni..." which means "I do not know, you do not know...". Because of the fact that the hypothesis that CA was based on, that errors could be predicted through the comparison of L1 and L2, did not account for many types of errors, researchers took a different approach called "Error Analysis" which did not seek to predict errors. As Lightbown and Spada hold (1999:73) "Rather, it sought to discover and describe different kinds of errors in an effort to understand how learners process second language data". According to Error Analysis, the error in the negative prefix, that I made, is called intralingual because it stems from the processing of the new linguistic system. It has nothing to do with L1 interference and is due to the overgeneralisation of a rule in a context where it does not belong. Richards (1972), cited in Johnson (2001:66), calls these errors developmental, implying that they resemble the errors children make when they learn their first language. In fact, Error Analysis was based on the assumption that the second language learner forms his own linguistic system which is rule-governed just like children do. Selinker (1972), cited in Lightbown and Spada (1999:74) names this system "Interlanguage" and argues that it is a dynamic system based upon learners' hypothesis and conclusions as they gradually progress towards the mastery of the new linguistic system. As a result, Error Analysis was considered a significant breakthrough because it reinforced the idea that learners' errors provide access and important information about the process of the new linguistic system, that is about the progress of learner's "Interlanguage". <heading>IV) The Importance of Input and Output </heading><heading>Input and Output in My Learning Experience</heading>Two of the major factors that slowed down my progress in Persian were the inadequate amount of input I received and output I produced. The only sources of input were the cassette and the book which followed a rather fast pace for me to keep up with. More specifically, the cassette did not provide much chance to practise the sounds in isolation and the rehearsal of the pronunciation of words was quite limited. In the book, each unit introduced a wide range of unknown vocabulary that it was difficult to remember and structures that were beyond my current level of competence. In addition, there was almost no visual input, like pictures and images that would facilitate the process of learning and make it more enjoyable. Due to the fact that Persian was included in the course as a means of putting into practise a number of language teaching and learning theories on our own, the instruction and feedback from the part of the teacher was limited. As far as output is concerned, the situation was similar. I did not have much chance to practise what I was trying to learn, apart from a short number of exercises in the book. Furthermore, due to the fact that I was afraid of making mistakes I refrained from trying to speak in Persian with other students. To conclude, the amount of interaction with native speakers of the language and with other students was too inadequate to practise and check if my performance was correct. <heading>The Input Hypothesis</heading>As Krashen (1985:2) holds the most important ingredient for language learning is exposure to comprehensible input. He argues that learners will move from stage "i" to stage "i+1" only if they are exposed to input that contains forms and structures that are slightly beyond their present level of competence. Linked to this hypothesis is the belief that "If input is understood, and there is enough of it, the necessary grammar is automatically provided" (Krashen, 1985:2). Consequently, the necessary grammar will be covered not through the immediate teaching of the relevant structures but through plenty of comprehensible input. Only then, the learner will be able to automatically pick out parts that are understandable to him. In addition, Krashen (1985:2) moves on to support that the learner will start speaking the language only if enough samples of comprehensible input have been accumulated and processed in his mind, just as children do. Evidence for Krashen's hypothesis comes from child-directed speech. Children acquire their first language by means of constant exposure to their parents' speech which is properly modified in order to become comprehensible. Krashen holds (1985:5) that parents do not modify their speech for the purpose of teaching the next grammatical structure but in order to help their children interpret what they utter. As a result, "...communicative, roughly-tuned, comprehensible input has some real advantages over finely-tuned input that aims directly at i+1 ..." (Krashen, 1987:25).Teachers should modify their speech with the purpose of real communication to ensure comprehensibility and language acquisition. Furthermore, the Input hypothesis highlights that the formal classroom setting is of high importance to second language learners. As Krashen (1982:30) maintains "...the classroom may be an excellent place for second language acquisition, at least up to the 'intermediate' level". Although many people argue that input from informal environments is superior to classroom input for successful learning, this does not apply to elementary learners or to those who live in a country where the target language is not spoken. Beginners, in a setting outside the confines of a classroom, will be overwhelmed by a huge amount of incomprehensible input that they would not know how to utilize. On the contrary, in a language learning setting, students are exposed to input that is modified to meet their needs and fit to their level of knowledge. Moreover, in places where the target language is not spoken as a mother tongue, classroom instruction becomes the only significant source of comprehensible input. Krashen (1985:13) holds that "Language classes are less helpful when (1) the students are already advanced enough to understand some input from the outside world, and (2) this input is available to them". Otherwise, language teaching functions as the primary source of comprehensible input. According to my Persian learning experience, the input that I received from the book was gradually becoming more and more incomprehensible for it introduced new structures without giving sufficient practice. Specifically, it was rather difficult for me to understand the gist of the dialogue as I heard it from the tape after unit three, apart from isolated words, which had a negative impact on my motivation. On the contrary, the few lessons that our teacher devoted to discussing with the class the various problems of this learning experience, improved considerably my progress. It is not random that the grammatical structures that I can fairly easy retrieve from my memory and use are in fact the exact input that I received from my teacher. <heading>The Interaction Hypothesis</heading>Krashen has been criticised of attributing to the learner a rather passive role. According to the Input Hypothesis, the learner's mere role is to be exposed to plenty of comprehensible input. Moreover, Krashen does not explain how learners are able to decode meaning and process the L2 forms and structures. Mitchell and Myles (2004:105) hold that Krashen does not provide enough empirical evidence concerning his argument that learners access L2 forms by noticing incongruity between the received input and their current level of knowledge. Thus, there is no sufficient explanation as to how modified input will be processed by learners so as to become comprehensible. Lightbown and Spada (1999:43) maintain that Long (1985) takes up Krashen's hypothesis and expands it by positing that modified interaction between learners and their peers, teachers or native speakers of the language is what makes input comprehensible. When learners are engaged in interaction with others, they are likely to experience difficulties in the comprehension and production of meaning. These misunderstandings will lead interlocutors to adapt what they are saying until input is rendered comprehensible. According to Pica (1994:494) this process that has come to be known as the negotiation of meaning is the "...modification and restructuring of interaction that occurs when learners and their interlocutors anticipate, perceive, or experience difficulties in message comprehensibility". Consequently, these modifications are the result of negotiation and involve various techniques such as clarification requests from the part of the hearer to which speakers respond with repetitions, paraphrasing, simplifications and confirmation checks (Lightbown and Spada, 1999:43). By means of negotiating around meaning with their interlocutors, learners focus their attention on the differences between the target structures and their competence and advance to higher levels of linguistic knowledge. The Interaction Hypothesis places great emphasis on the contribution of the learner to the learning process because negotiation during interaction seems "...to suggest, therefore, that learners' comprehension of meaning can be the result of their access to L2 form rather than its precursor" (Pica, 1994:508). Comprehension of meaning does not suffice to make learners aware of the structures that meaning lies in. Instead, learners' involvement in the construction and interpretation of meaning is what facilitates second language acquisition and assists learners to focus on the various L2 forms. In addition, Brown (2000:288) argues that Interaction Hypothesis "...centers us on the language classroom not just as a place where learners of varying abilities and styles and backgrounds, mingle, but as a place where the contexts of interaction are carefully designed". Thus, the language classroom does not function only as a place to practise grammatical structures and language forms but also as the most appropriate and well-designed context for communicative interaction to occur. <heading>D) The Output Hypothesis</heading>Because the Interaction Hypothesis involves both the notion of input and output, it is significant to highlight the role of the latter in a foreign language learning situation, as well. The Output Hypothesis advanced by Swain (1995) supports that only second language production prompts learners to reflect upon the construction of message meaning and thus develop in the foreign language morphology and syntax. The Output Hypothesis is based on the fact that productive skills are more demanding than receptive skills. It is common knowledge that it is much easier to read and listen in a foreign language than to write and speak. It was much more difficult for me to speak in Persian than to read and listen to my teacher and fellow students. Consequently, language output is part of the productive skills and involves quite different processes from comprehending language. Swain (1995:127) argues that "In speaking and writing, learners can 'stretch' their interlanguage to meet communicative goals". Consequently, the more learners are involved in producing language the more they will develop their interlanguage system to fit to their needs. More specifically, Swain (1995:128) proposes three functions of the learner output. The first one is the "noticing/triggering" role or the "conscious-raising" function. According to Swain (1995) second language output pushes learners to use their existing knowledge to convey meaning. In their attempt, they may notice problems and gaps in their linguistic system of the foreign language. The second function of output is the "hypothesis testing". It is assumed that output provides learners with the opportunity to experiment with new structures and to test weather their guesses are correct or not. Usually, the feedback learners receive from their interlocutors functions as an indicator whether an utterance is well-formed or not. Lastly, the third role of output is the "metalinguistic function" or "conscious reflecting" role. Swain (1995) argues that language production gives learners the opportunity not only to recognise their linguistic problems but to consciously reflect upon them. In my Persian learning experience, the opportunities to produce language output were restricted. Nevertheless, whenever I was asked to speak in Persian, either in coursebook exercises or in interaction with my teacher and other students, I found out that I could hardly put into practise the grammar structures and lexical items that I have studied. Knowledge is not enough, instead repeated practice and production is required which I lacked. In addition, it is worth referring to the experience of interacting with a native speaker of the Persian language. Although, our teacher had equipped the class in advance with all the relevant knowledge to tackle with this short interaction, I realised once again that it is more difficult to produce output and process input simultaneously, especially in natural conversation where topic shift and the use of vocabulary and linguistic structures is not limited to learners' knowledge. However, the linguistic items that I interpreted and produced during the interaction are those parts of the language that I can effortlessly remember and use. <heading>V) Conclusion </heading>In conclusion, learning Persian was a difficult but at the same time interesting experience, because it was the first time that I tried to learn a foreign language not by means of my mother tongue (Greek) but through a language (English) that I have not achieved yet a native-like mastery. Through this experience I realised that as far as language learning is concerned, exposure to comprehensible input, either in the form of classroom instructions and teaching or in the form of modified teacher talk, along with target language production from the part of the learner and interaction with other speakers are of great significance. However, the prerequisite, in order for these three factors to facilitate the learning process, is learner's internal drive and enthusiasm for the language. Lastly, the amount of studying that the learner devotes is quite crucial. Personally, I have to admit that, because of the fact that I lacked the practice that input and output offers to a learner, I should have invested more time and effort to the learning process. 