<heading>1. INTRODUCTION</heading>The notion of syllable is one of the key issues in Phonetics and Phonology as it determines the structure and comprehensible production of speech. Its significance has led many linguists to develop several theories for its structure such as: onset - rhyme, mora theory, body - coda organization and flat structure among others. The purpose of the essay is firstly to provide a critical evaluation of the system for syllable structure presented in Roach (2000) by comparing it to flat structure, and secondly to discuss the importance of a good understanding of syllable and its structure in pronunciation teaching in a language classroom situation. <heading>2. NATURE OF SYLLABLE</heading>There are two main patterns governing the syllable structure: a) sonority hierarchy and b) phonotactics. To start with, every syllable contains a vowel which is the most sonorous element (Katamba, 1989, p. 169) and which can be preceded or followed by consonants according to the sonority hierarchy. As it is stated "less sonorous sounds preceding the nucleus are assigned to the initial C - element (...) and those following it are assigned to the other C - element" (Katamba, 1989, p. 159). Apart from this pattern, syllables are governed by a set of phonological consonants which determine "the possible combinations of phonemes" (Roach, 2000, p. 71). However, different linguists find different sets of restrictions underlying the syllable and thus form different theories about its structure. One such theory is flat structure. <heading>3. FLAT STRUCTURE</heading>Its basic implication is that "each of the segments is an immediate constituent of the syllable node, with no intervening nodes" (Ewen & Hulst, 2001, p. 129). Its proponents have observed that the vowel can be easily attached to the preceding consonants as well as to the following ones. However, instead of favoring one aspect against the other they claim that "co-occurrence restrictions holding between the nucleus and preceding elements of the syllable [are] as common as co-occurrence restrictions holding between the nucleus and the following elements" (Clements & Keyser, 1983, p. 20). (For more reference see Appendix). Overall, this view has been very strongly criticized by other theories such as the Onset Rhyme theory that is analyzed next. <heading>4. ONSET RHYME THEORY</heading>According to this theory the consonants occurring before the vowel (nucleus) are called onset whereas those coming after it are called coda. Besides, the restrictions between peak and coda are noticeably more common (Fudge, 1987, p. 361) and the grouping of "peak & coda together [is called] (...) the rhyme of the syllable" (Giegerich, 1992, p. 138). In fact, most linguists seem to coincide to this view and elaborate on it. Besides, as Clements and Keyser (1983) admit, "a few of these constraints could, perhaps, be regarded as accidental gaps" (p. 21). <heading>5. ROACH'S SYSTEM</heading>Roach (2000) develops a system for analyzing the possible combinations of English phonemes. He starts by describing the segments that can be part of the onset: a) "zero onset", (...) b) "one consonant" (...) and c) "consonant cluster" (p. 71) and then moves on to describe the coda and its constituents parts: a) "zero coda", (...) b) "final consonant", (...) and c) "consonant final cluster") (p. 73). Finally, he presents the syllable structure according to Onset - Rhyme theory. <heading>5. 1 STRENGTHS</heading>Overall his system is very clearly structured and easily understood. The presentation starts from the onset where every single possibility is taken into consideration. After the analysis of simple onsets he discusses more complex ones by providing the possible combinations of clusters in a table. Then, following the same structure, he cites the coda combinations through examples and tables. So, one can easily follow his interpretation by looking carefully at the analysis. This analysis is more refined compared to Harris' (1994) where neither tables nor examples are provided thus making it hard for the reader to go through. Furthermore, Roach (2000) does not present his system as the most accurate one, but acknowledges its limitations. Thus although he makes no distinction between onset and rhyme components in his system, he refers to onset-rhyme theory, by calling it "a more refined analysis of the syllable" (p. 76). Also, he recognizes and records other linguists' proposal about syllable structure as for example the idea that "since post-initial j only occurs before , u: and (...) one can postulate a diphthong j and remove j from post-initial position" (Roach, 2000, p. 79). However apart from these strengths his system has certain weaknesses that will now be examined. <heading>5. 2 WEAKNESSES</heading>Firstly, the terminology (pre-initial, initial, post-final 1... post-final 3) he uses is rather confusing for the reader and causes several problems. Specifically, by treating pre-initial /s/ as part of the onset and post-final /s/ as part of the coda correspondingly, he debars the sonority hierarchy. Particularly, pre-initial /s/ is more sonorous than the following /p, t, k/ consonants and "violates the generalization that onset sequences increase in sonority" (Giegerich, 1992, p. 139). On the other hand and according to Harris (1994), "segments decrease in sonority the further they occur from the nucleus" (p. 56). Yet, post-final /s/ is more sonorous than the preceding /p, t, k/ post-final sounds. Therefore, a proposal made by Ewen and Hulst (2001) is to consider pre-initial /s/ as separate from the onset and treat it as prependix whereas post-final /s/ as an appendix (p. 138). Finally, another idea is that "sp, st, sk could be treated as individual phonemes, removing the pre-initial position from the syllable onset" (cited in Roach, 2000, p. 79). Secondly, although English distinguishes between long vowels, short vowels and diphthongs, Roach's main interest is not in the possible nucleus positions but in the sounds occurring under onset and coda categories only. However, this distinction is important and needs to be shown in the syllable structure. In addition, according to Ewen and Hulst (2001), "long vowels (...) occupy two positions in the rhyme, and as such have exactly the same structure as diphthongs" (pp. 132-3). Finally as Harris (1994) supports, "the difference between branching and non branching nuclei is the formal expression of a contrast between long and short vowels" (p. 65). <heading>6. PEDAGOGIC IMPLICATIONS</heading>After examining the syllable structure at a theoretical level, the paper moves on to discuss the importance of a good understanding of syllable and syllable structure in pronunciation teaching. <heading>6.1 RHYTHM OF SPEECH</heading>Initially, the understanding of syllable and syllable structure is necessary when teaching the rhythm of speech as according to Ladefoged (2001), "there are (...) cases where people disagree on how many syllables there are in a word in English" (p. 244). So teachers have to indicate to learners that English is a stress-timed language (Celce-Murcia, Brinton & Goodwin, 1996 p. 154). One of their priorities is to teach the distinction between stressed and unstressed syllables highlighting the fact that "stressed syllables (...) have higher pitch and longer duration than their non-stressed counterparts" (Katamba, 1989, p. 221). Finally, they must clearly indicate which words in a sentence tend to receive stress because students usually place stress in each single word and this hinders comprehensibility. <heading>6. 2 CONSONANT CLUSTERS</heading>Furthermore, a thorough knowledge of syllable and its structure helps teachers to identify possible problems with consonant clusters (Cruttenden, 1997, p. 222). Based on their familiarity with the learners' native language, they can easily explain all the possible and impossible combinations of clusters and predict learners' errors. As a matter of fact, different languages allow different consonant clustering so the best piece of advice for teachers is to start "with the presentation of initial clusters because they tend to be easier for students to produce" (Celce-Murcia et al., 1996, p. 85). Finally, their role is to raise learners' awareness of the differences and similarities in consonant clustering between English and their native language through examples and lots of practice. <heading>6. 3 VOWEL SOUNDS</heading>Apart from that, the importance of syllable structure is evident when teaching vowel sounds. In this case, teachers must clarify the distinction between diphthongs, long and short vowels in the pronunciation of words by considering branching and non-branching nuclei. However, as not all languages make this distinction, learners of English often make errors leading to unsuccessful communication. For example, "when a learner says (...) soap in a (...) restaurant where they should have said soup, the inaccurate production can lead to misunderstanding" (Kelly, 2000, p. 11). Therefore, teachers need to illustrate for learners how these vowel sounds can differentiate between word meanings. So theoretical knowledge of syllable structure will allow them to teach these units by designing activities on minimal pairs and drilling. <heading>6. 4 MY LEARNING EXPERIENCE</heading>Before this paper reaches its conclusion, a connection between the importance of syllable structure in pronunciation teaching and my learning and limited teaching experience needs to be made. To start with, I had been taught English as a foreign language for seven years in Greece but pronunciation was never part of the lesson. Some teachers considered it insignificant, whereas others had inadequate knowledge of it. One of my most vivid memories is that of my best teacher saying "do not try to divide syllables", as she considered the rule for syllable division very difficult to teach. When I entered the department of English language and literature in the university and I took the module "teaching the pronunciation of English", I realized the importance of a good understanding of pronunciation for the learner and the teacher as well. <heading>6. 5 MY TEACHING EXPERIENCE</heading>I have only taught to beginners for a limited period of time but yet I have identified problems with teaching the pronunciation of long vowels and consonant clusters. For example, as Greek lacks longs vowels my students mispronounced words such as "heart, pool". With regards to consonant clusters they mispronounced clusters such as "nd and mb". According to Dalton and Seidhofer (1994), "Greek speakers tend to simplify final nd, mb, and ng, by dropping the nasal consonant, so that "bend" becomes "bed", and "send" may be misheard as "sed" ''(p. 119). Overall, we tried to overcome the errors by introducing activities on minimal pairs, drilling and other similar ones. <heading>7. CONCLUSION</heading>In conclusion, the first half of this paper provided a critical evaluation of Roach's system for syllable structure, whereas the second half presented the importance of syllable and its structure in pronunciation teaching. However, one of its basic limitations is that there was no analysis of other theories of syllable structure such as mora theory or body-coda organization that could give us a better insight to syllable structure and a more critical view to Roach's system. Furthermore, the reference to the pedagogic implications of syllable and its structure was limited to the teaching of stress, vowels and consonant clusters. However, the importance of syllable could also be seen in teaching intonation and syllabic consonants. Nevertheless, the essay has brought to the surface many interesting views about the syllable and syllable structure and thus leads to further investigation of similar issues one being the teaching of pronunciation: what it includes and how it can be succeeded. 