<heading>A. INTRODUCTION</heading>Discourse Analysis looks at language in terms of social interaction. According to Michael McCarthy (1991), "discourse analysis is a vast subject area within linguistics, encompassing [...] the analysis of spoken and written language over and above concerns such as the structure of the clause or sentence" (p. 32). However, this paper focuses only on written discourse by analysing a text based on two main approaches: cohesion and thematization. Particularly, the discussion begins with a brief outline of the context of the sample, followed by an exposition of the two approaches based on background literature. Then, it moves on to a detailed analysis of the text and finally concludes with the limitations of the analysis. <heading>B. CONTEXT OF DISCOURSE</heading>To begin with, the features that are important with regards to the context of discourse are the following: channel, formality, purpose, relationship between the addressor and the addressee, topic and setting. Here, the channel is written and has the form of a formal letter including the addresses' full address, the date, and the formulaic opening and closing expressions: "Dear Mr Miller" and "Yours Sincerely". However, it is a genuine charity letter signed by a well-known game show host celebrity, aiming to personalize it and sensitise the addressee to provide financial help to the leukaemic children. What is striking about its format is that it has a title and a subtitle accompanied by a visual image of two children. The title is in bold letters that easily catch the reader's attention, whereas the words "children" and "leukaemia" are capitalized, stressing the children's difficult state. The subtitle "inaugurated by Princess" gives value to those people's work and the phrase "no 298405" reveals that it is really a general letter sent to many people, yet easy to become personalized by the addition of the addressee's name. Finally, the names given in the right column, as well as the "P.S." and the sketch next to the signature add to the letter's general purpose of persuasion. <heading>C. LITERATURE REVIEW-COHESION</heading>This part of the paper presents a literary review of the first approach, followed by a justification for its selection. It then concludes with the analysis of the text. There are many texts that, although they are grammatically correct, are not cohesive. Such texts lack connectivity between sequences and so readers face difficulty in deciphering their meaning. As McCarthy (1991) supports, "English offers a [...] set of options for creating surface links between the clauses and sentences of a text otherwise known as cohesion" (p. 25). In addition, Halliday and Hasan's (1976) system (as cited in Hatch, 1992, p. 223) "distinguishes five major types of grammatical cohesive ties: reference, substitution, ellipsis, conjunction, and lexical ties." These ties as Brown and Yule (1983) acknowledge: "bind a text together" (p. 191). As Thompson (1996) points out, "reference is a set of grammatical recourses that allow the speaker to indicate whether something is being repeated from somewhere earlier in the text" (p. 180). It is binary: "the first [...] is known as exophoric ('pointing outwards') whereas the second is anaphoric ('pointing inwards') (Thompson, 1996, p. 181). The second cohesive tie is ellipsis, where "a clause [...] may be presupposed at a subsequent place in the text by the device of positive omission" (Halliday, 1985, p. 288). The third, on the other hand, is substitution that takes place when "an expression may simply be replaced by another in the text" (Brown and Yule, 1983, p. 201). The fourth type of cohesive tie is conjunction. According to Hatch (1992), "here are several different kinds of conjunctive relations: additive [...], adversative [...], causal [...] and temporal" (p. 225). The last type of cohesion is lexical cohesion. According to Brown and Yule (1983), "cohesion may be derived from lexical relationships like hyponymy [...], part-whole [...], collocability [...], clausal substitution [...], comparison [...] and by syntactic repetition" (p. 194). <heading>D. REASONS FOR CHOOSING COHESION</heading>Before proceeding to the analysis of the text based on cohesion, it is necessary to mention the reasons for selecting it. Firstly, as it is clear by the pertinent review, many linguists have studied this approach and perceive it as one of the main approaches for analysing written discourse. Furthermore, cohesion offers an insight into the meaning relations between the various elements of a text, as knowledge of the grammatical relations between words is not enough. Finally, according to Halliday (1985), "in order to construct discourse we need to be able to establish [...] relations that may involve elements of any extent [...] (and) this cannot be achieved by grammatical structure" (p. 288). <heading>E. ANALYSIS OF TEXT - COHESION</heading><heading>E.1. REFERENCE</heading><heading>E.1.1. EXOPHORA</heading>The forms, which according to Brown and Yule (1983) "direct the hearer or reader to look elsewhere for their interpretation" (p. 192), are exophoric. For instance, phrases such as "seller and buyer" (l. 14), "life" (l. 1) do not refer to another item inside the text. On the contrary, they point to the outside world or make reference to things or people that are assumed as known by the addressee. Also the personal pronoun "I" (l. 4) has an exophoric use as according to Thompson (1996), " 'I' means the person who is speaking now in the real world' rather than the person just referred to in the text'" (p. 181). The phrase "CHILDREN with LEUKAEMIA" is also an example of exophora since it refers to the name of the institute that helps the children and not to the children themselves. (For more examples see Appendix 1). <heading>E.1.2 ENDOPHORA</heading>The other type of reference is endophoric. According to Thompson (1996), "most cohesive endophoric reference is anaphoric ('pointing backwards')" (p. 181). For instance, "they" (l. 8) points back to the phrase "my friends" (l. 7) and "your help" refers to "Mr Miller". The phrase "on their behalf" (l. 21) refers to the "leukaemic children" (l. 19), and "yourself" (l. 17) refers to "you" (l. 10). Thus, the writer resorts to the use of personal pronouns in order to avoid repetition. Apart from anaphora, there is a second endophoric reference called cataphora. In this case, the cohesive ties point ahead so that a word or phrase is not specified until further on in the text. For instance, "child-killer disease" (l. 4) points forwards to leukaemia (l. 4). The word "help" (l. 9) is an example of cataphora, since the addressor does not state the kind of help until later (ll.10, 11). Moreover, the word "other" (l. 15) according to Thompson (1996), [is a] "comparative attached to one entity concept [and] thus implies the existence of the other entity / concept" (p. 183). <heading>E.2. SUBSTITUTION</heading>Moving on to the second type of cohesion, substitution, one can trace in the text several entities that are replaced by others belonging to the same grammatical category. As Halliday (1985) suggests, "there are three main contexts for ellipsis and substitution in English. These are 1) the clause, 2) the verbal group and 3) the nominal group" (p. 297). Hence, the phrase "do it" (l. 8) replacing the verbal group in ll.7-8 "find the answers". <heading>E.3. ELLIPSIS</heading>Compared to the one example of substitution, instances of ellipsis are easily evident throughout the text. For example: "which" implied for 'questions' (l. 2), "for which" for 'disease' (l. 4). Instances of verbal groups such as "my friends [are working]" (l. 7), "perhaps [will] a friend [...?]" (l.10) are also ellipses from the text. Though they are omitted, the reader can easily guess the meaning of the elliptical words. (For further examples see Appendix 1). <heading>E.4. CONJUNCTION</heading>The fourth type of cohesion is conjunction. This category includes logical connectors that help the writer to edit their text carefully. The connector "and" (l. 5) adds more information to the sentence by referring to more than one element. The conjunction "but" (l. 8) on the other hand, has the adversative role of showing that although people are trying hard, they cannot cure the disease. Also, "thanks to" (l. 12) signifies a causal relationship between the two clauses. Finally, in lines 18-19 there is a causal - conditional relationship between Mr Miller's support of the addressor's appeal and the following result of ensuring the benefits of his actions. <heading>E.5. LEXICAL COHESION</heading>Finally, various types of lexical cohesion link the text together and create a unified whole. To begin with, several words are repeated: "found" (ll. 5, 6) and "answers"(ll. 13, 15). Also, the word "child-killer disease" (l. 4) is used as a synonym for "leukaemia" (l. 4). Although the verbs "receive" and "win" are not really synonymous, in this particular context they act as such, since both refer to "prizes". Another type of lexical cohesion is hyponymy, as in: "disease and leukaemia". Besides, a cohesion tie that most writers prefer to use in their texts is collocation. This refers to words that go together in a context and complement each other such as "question-answers" (ll. 2, 3), or antonyms "seller and the buyer" (l. 14). Consequently, lexical cohesion allows the writer to play with words and enrich his text. (For more reference see Appendix 1). As a result, this section of the paper has looked at how cohesive devices connect ideas within the text. By now it is clear that the interpretation of one item is based on the understanding of another. The following part of the essay provides a literary review of thematization and examines its application in the text. <heading>F. LITERATURE REVIEW -THEMATIZATION</heading>Thematization, focusing on the order of information in a sentence, is a different way of analysing a written text. The theme can be considered as the point of departure of the message (Halliday, 1985, p. 38). It can also be seen as that "which locates and orients the clause within its own context" (as cited in Thompson, 1996, p. 143). Halliday (1985) goes even further to provide a more extended definition of theme stating that " the theme of any clause, [...] extends up to [and includes] the topical Theme" (p. 56). There are several types of themes such as: subject or adjunct themes, thematizing structures and predicated themes. A theme can have three parts: a textual, an interpersonal and an ideational one. According to Matthiessen & Painter (1997), "the textual and interpersonal stages to the Theme may or may not be present" (p. 24). When they are present the order is "textual + interpersonal + ideational" (McCarthy, 1983, p.58). Also a theme can have three different statuses: unmarked (following a normal word order), marked (where something is put forward into the slot), and enhanced in thematizing structures. The rheme, on the other hand, is the comment: "what the speaker states about, or in regard to, the starting point of the utterance" (as cited in Brown & Yule, 1983, pp. 126-7). As Thompson (1996) suggests, " the rheme provides the content, the main information that the writer or speaker wants the addressee to know" (p. 165). The rheme of the first sentence organizes the progression of topics in the structure of the text. In general, the linking between theme and rheme helps the writer to explain the topic organization. <heading>G. REASONS FOR SELECTING THEMATIZATION</heading>First and foremost, the progression of a text is critically dependent upon the writer's thematic choices. So, any changes in them, signal a change in his perspective and way of looking at the text. Therefore, it is extremely important for a reader to know how to analyse a text in terms of this approach, in order to understand and evaluate the writer's ideas. Also, as Halliday (1985) reports, " the choice of clause Themes [...] constitutes what is often known as 'the method of development' of the text" (p. 62). As a conclusion, "analysing the thematic structure of a text gives us an insight into its texture" (Halliday, 1985, p. 67). <heading>H. ANALYSIS OF TEXT - THEMATIZATION</heading>The text is divided into four paragraphs. The theme of the first paragraph introduces the topic of the whole text. The phrase "life...show" (l.1) links the whole paragraph back to the concept of life with its unanswered questions that make us wonder. The first rheme, in addition, completes the theme by commenting on life's unexpected nature. In this rheme, there is a sub-theme "we" and a sub-rheme "still ... answers" (ll. 2,3). The second sentence, however, has a more specific theme, which initiates the problem of leukaemia, whereas the rheme analyses its seriousness. Therefore, the writer makes a general comment by setting the frame of his topic and now moves on in its analysis. In the second paragraph, in contrast, there is a change of topic from "life" to "I". Here, the addressor expresses his awareness that there are people who work hard to find a cure. The transition in the development of the text is very smooth and the clauses are nicely linked together. The first rheme, "my friends" (l. 7) is picked up by the next theme, emphasizing people's work in that institute. Picked up theme as Lock (1996) claims, " is a thematized constituent [...] later picked up by a pronoun in an unmarked position in the clause" (p. 227). The rheme following it, consisting of many sub-themes, comments on people's need for financial help. In the third paragraph, and having stated the situation, the author moves on to explain the purpose of his letter. The theme introduces the topic of the paragraph, which is about persuading the addressee to sell the tickets. The rheme is part of an interrogative clause. Since it is a yes/no question, according to Halliday (1985), "the element that functions as Theme is the element that embodies the expression of polarity" (p. 47). In addition, the next clause provides information about the prizes. The theme changes, whereas the rheme is picked up by the previous one. Finally, the paragraph ends with a complex clause, where theme and rheme are picked up from the previous clauses, emphasizing the writer's request. In conclusion, the last paragraph states the benefits that will arise from selling the tickets. It starts with a picked up multiple theme, "By...you" (l. 18), followed by a rheme: "will ensure...treatments" (ll. 18-21) that expresses a causal-conditional relationship to it, and is later picked up by the next theme (l.21). Here, the letter reaches its conclusion. Thus, the writer manages to state the problem, develop his argumentation and express his request in a rather convincing way. (For further evidence see Appendix 2). <heading>I. CONCLUSION</heading>To sum up, the primary purpose of this paper was to examine how the two main approaches of written discourse (cohesion and thematization) shed light on the way discourse works. However, there is another related approach to discourse analysis that this paper does not refer to, called clause relationships. This approach constitutes a first limitation of this study. A second limitation is that thematization brought up several difficulties in identifying the theme and rheme of each clause. The instances were not always clear-cut and thus allowed for various interpretations. However, besides these limitations, this paper leads to future study of other approaches of discourse analysis and the possible pedagogic implications these carry. 