This quote from the Iliad said by Glaucus epitomises what it was to be a Homeric hero. They were the elite and their glory came from fighting. But each hero had a varying view on fighting, and what it meant to be a hero, and this is what I will look at in this essay. There were many reasons to go into battle, for the salvation of your people, the respect of your men, and for your own personal glory. These can be divided in to two sections, a culture of shame, and a culture of guilt. In a shame culture you fought for the glory others would heap upon you, and for the contempt they would feel for you if you were too cowardly to fight. A guilt culture is one in which you fought for your own morals and beliefs, in the knowledge that you would not be able to bear yourself if you did not stand up to the challenge of battle. Both these features of being a hero appear in Achilles, Diomedes and Hector and it is to what extent that I will compare in this essay. Each man has his own 'heroic code' dependant on his moral opinions, and certain events in the Iliad change their view of this code as the Book progresses. <heading>The Importance of Respect</heading>Respect, or timê in Greek, was every thing to a hero. Diomedes' actions are formulated to win him as much respect as possible from the Greeks. In Book Ten he volunteers to go on the night attack to the Trojan camp. This could be seen as highly dishonourable because it is not fair to your opponent to attack them while they are asleep and defenceless, but Diomedes takes up the charge solely for respect: 'Nestor, my own heart and my own proud spirit arouse me to go into the host of hateful men who lie near us,' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 10: l. 220-1). He knows that he will win the admiration of his men if he goes and brings back some trophy to prove that he killed some of the Trojans. Hector however cares greatly about the respect of his soldiers and his countrymen. When he is about to face Achilles in the final battle between them he says: 'I feel shame before the Trojans and the Trojan women with trailing robes, that someone who is less of a man than I will say of me: "Hector believed in his own strength and ruined his people."' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 22: l. 105-8). He does not want men of lower status than him to think badly of him, he feels that as he is a superior fighter he should uphold the honour and safety of Troy. He goes out to fight Achilles knowing that he will be killed, but he does it because he would look like a coward in the eyes of those who respect him. Timê is the main reason why Achilles does not fight for most of the Iliad. The poem begins with Achilles anger at Agamemnon's lack of respect for him and insulting behaviour towards him. The main theme of the poem is Achilles' refusal to fight over the few days in which the Iliad is set, and the effects that that has on the Trojan War. He is tired of not receiving due respect for his actions from King Agamemnon, especially when Agamemnon does him the injustice of taking back Briseis: 'And now my prize you threaten in person to strip from me, for whom I laboured much,' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 1: l. 161-2). But timê is also the reason why Achilles stays in Troy and rejoins the fighting. He is told by his mother Thetis that two fates await him in life. He can either return home to Greece and live a peaceful life and die of old age surrounded by his family. Or he can stay in Troy where he will certainly die but his fame will live on for many years. Immortalising your name so it lived on even when you were dead was one of the main aims for a Homeric hero, and Achilles cannot resist the honour and glory it would win him. <heading>The Aristeia In The Iliad</heading>An 'aristeia' is the Greek for when the narrative centres on one warrior and his deeds and killings for a while, and it is one of the things all three heroes have in common. Hector, Achilles, and Diomedes all have aristeia in the Iliad. An aristeia can always be recognised because it is preceded by an arming scene where we see the hero deliberately putting on his armour and weapons and preparing himself to go in to battle. Diomedes' aristeia is in Book Five, when he is inspired by Athene with extra strength and courage. In this instance he is partly a substitute for Achilles as the dominant Greek warrior. He storms through the Trojan ranks killing every one in his path: 'raging as had been before to fight with the Trojans, now the strong rage tripled took hold of him,' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 5: l. 135-6). There follows a long list of Trojans who Diomedes kills in his recklessness. One of the men he kills who is most closely documented is Pandaros, a skilled Trojan archer, who Diomedes kills with a spear guided by Athene's hand. He is even told by Athene to fire an arrow at Aphrodite, which he does and wounds her. He is so involved in his rage that he wounds two gods, Aphrodite and Ares, and feels no remorse for his terrible actions. Hector's aristeia comes in Book Sixteen when he rampages through the Greek troops and kills Patroclus who he assumes is Achilles, since he is wearing his armour: 'But Hector, when he saw high hearted Patroclus trying to get away... and with the spear stabbed him in the depth of the belly and drove the bronze clean through.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 16: l. 818-21). Patroclus and the Myrmidons have driven the Trojan army back to the walls of Troy and Patroclus has just killed Sarpedon when Hector ambushes him and slaughters him. This is uncharacteristic of Hector who does not usually fight on an impulse but likes to plan his attack. Achilles' aristeia is perhaps the largest in the Iliad. In Book Eighteen he learns of Patroclus death and blames himself for it because he allowed Patroclus to go in to battle wearing his (Achilles') armour. There follows in Book Nineteen Achilles' arming scene and in Book Twenty his subsequent rampage through the Trojan battle lines, killing every one in his path until he reaches Hector and takes his revenge. His arming scene is the longest, as his own armour has been taken by Hector from Patroclus' body, so he needs new armour. His goddess mother Thetis goes to Hephaestos who forges a new shining set of armour and a shield for Achilles. He then charges on to the battle field: 'But the Trojans were taken every man in the knees with trembling and terror, as they looked on the swift-footed son of Peleus shining in all his armour, a man like the murderous war god.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 20: l. 44-6). Here Achilles presents quite a formidable appearance, and is compared to Ares himself. This description accurately portrays Achilles anger and determination to kill as many Trojans as he can. <heading>The 'Heroic Code'</heading>Each hero had a different view of what 'the heroic code' consisted on. Personally I think it was largely dependent on the man's view on life and what morals he himself adhered to. Achilles is a fiercely principled man, and this is why he reacts to every little thing with such emotion. The classic example of this which I have already looked at is his refusal to fight because Agamemnon slighted him. Another example comes later in the Iliad after Achilles has rejoined the fighting to avenge Patroclus in Book Nineteen. Achilles says to Agamemnon: 'But before this, for me at least, neither drink nor food shall go down my very throat, since my companion has perished and lies inside my shelter' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 19: l. 209-11). The event he refers to at the beginning is of course the vengeance he wants to take on the Trojans, and in particular Hector, for killing Patroclus. In this passage he is telling Agamemnon that the men have no time for eating but should carry on fighting until they have revenge, and then have a large feast. This demonstrates well how set in his ways Achilles is and how determined he is to stick by his principles. He was a young man when he came to Troy, only about nineteen or twenty, and his age shows in his heroic code, and also in how quickly he becomes disillusioned in it when he learns that few people in battle fight for such strong principles as he. Hector's heroic code revolves around his country rather than himself. He fights for Troy and his men rather than for his own personal glory. He goes on to the battlefield to save Troy from being sacked by the Greeks. When the Trojans are attacking the wall around the Greek ships and Poulydamas advises Hector to retreat as he has seen an unfavourable omen, Hector replies 'One bird sign is best: to fight in defence of our country.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 12: l. 243). His heroism also depends on his family, he wants to defend his father Priam, and his wife and child. He would have known what the Greeks would do to Andromache if they sacked Troy, and he is trying to save her from death, and secure a future for his son Astyanax. Diomedes again has a different personal heroic code to Hector and Achilles. His code depends mainly on his own glory but also on the glory of the Greeks for whom he fights. When an embassy to Achilles is suggested he criticises Agamemnon for being cowardly and says: 'the rest of the flowing-haired Achaians will stay here until we have sacked the city of Troy... still we two, Sthenelos and I, will fight till we witness the fall of Ilion;' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 9: l. 45-8). Diomedes will not run away from a fight like a coward, but will stay there until he has done what he came to do as a matter of honour. <heading>Material Culture And The Heroic Code</heading>Once a hero had killed someone he needed a way of proving it. In ancient times the best way of doing this was to strip your victim of his armour and take it back to camp on your chariot as spoils. This happens throughout the Iliad although as Griffin comments it is noticeable that Homer never allows the Trojans to take Greek armour as spoil, except for the case of Hector and Patroclus where it is necessary to the plot. (Griffin 1992: 24) In an example of the importance of plunder Hector says to Andromache about their son Astyanax 'and let him kill his enemy and bring home the blooded spoils, and delight the heart of his mother.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 6: l. 480-1). Achilles is deeply offended when he sees that Agamemnon never gives him his proper share of the spoils and this leads him to dislike him, 'Never, when the Achaians sack some well-founded citadel of the Trojans, do I have a prize that is equal to your prize.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 1: l. 163-40. Giving gifts was also a way of showing respect to another man, and this is why Achilles is so angry when Agamemnon takes back Briseis, who was a gift to him. Achilles shows himself to be better than the 'material-orientated heroic world' in Book Nine when the envoy from Agamemnon come to try to persuade him to rejoin the fighting. He refuses the many gifts Agamemnon offers him saying 'Not if he gave me ten times as much, and twenty times over as he possesses now... would Agamemnon have his way with my spirit.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 9: l. 379-386). Even when Achilles returns to the fighting in Book Nineteen and Agamemnon again offers him the gifts he promised, Achilles dismisses the offer saying that Agamemnon can give them to him if he thinks it is important, but that their real concern at that time should be fighting. Diomedes however embraces the idea of gifts and spoil as a sign of his prowess and to gain respect from others. In Book Six when he encounters Glaucus and they discover that their grandfathers were 'xenia' or 'guest friends' they agree not to fight each other and to swap armour. Diomedes is very cunning here as he swaps his bronze armour for Glaucus' gold, therefore making a profit by it '(Glaucus) who exchanged with Diomedes the son of Tydeus armour of gold for bronze, for nine oxen's worth the worth of a hundred.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 6: l. 234-6). When Diomedes goes on the night attack with Odysseus, and Odysseus plans to steal the horses of the Thracian king Rhesus, Diomedes gets carried away: 'But he waited, divided in his mind as to what he would best do, whether to seize the chariot, wherein lay the bright armour... or to strip the life from still more Thracians.' (Homer, Iliad, Bk. 6: l.503-6). <heading>Conclusion</heading>The attitudes to fighting of Achilles, Hector and Diomedes differ greatly in terms of each man's reason for fighting, but they do have certain features in common. All of them place considerable importance on respect and honour, but from different people in the case of all three heroes. All of them at one point in the Iliad have an aristeia which is their moment of glory and triumph in their career as warrior. They all have different versions of the 'heroic code'. Diomedes' is all about personal fame and glory, Hector cares foremost for his family and his country, and Achilles fights for his principles. Achilles loses faith in the heroic code and is determined to stick to his own views, but these are frequently not shared by older, more experienced warriors than him. Hector knows that he will die if he goes in to single combat with Achilles, but does so for the sake of his country, and the respect of the soldiers he commands. Diomedes is quick to fight for his country, and to rebuke any one who calls him a coward, and desires glory for himself and Greece. These men are all great heroes who fight and die in the wars of others, but die bravely, defending what they love and hold dear. 