<heading>Introduction</heading><heading>Objectives of this study</heading>The present study aims to discuss the implications for extension practice of changes in thinking about extension from 'transfer of technology' to 'communication to support innovation'. In order to discuss this topic, this study will present an overview of what innovation is, what transfer of technology focus, and the reasons why there is a need to shift from transfer of technology to an innovative approach in the extension practices context. <heading>Rural Extension</heading>In the context of this study, rural extension is defined as assistance to individuals living in rural areas (farmers or not) in helping them to identify and analyse their problems, and being aware of opportunities for improvement (see Adams, 1982). Extension was usually associated with increasing food production and encouraging economic development, having the function of promoting knowledge and transferring technology between farmers and researchers (or farmers to farmers) (Leeuwis, 2004:17). As a way of rethinking the roles of extension services, Van den Ban and Hawkins (1988:9) raised several questions regarding the meaning of extension and its intervention in farmers' decision-making and problem-solving capabilities. In our days, the concept of extension has changed, as it is understood that extension is not just a question of conveying a message or adopting technologies, but is much more related to shifting interdependencies and co-ordination between various actors (Leeuwis, 2004). <heading>What is Innovation? </heading>Before starting to discuss on the topic proposed, it is important to understand what innovation is. The literature shows that innovation is the implementation of a new or significantly improved idea, good, service, process or practice which is intended to be useful or perceived by individuals. According to Dantas (2005), the concept of innovation "refers to the search for, development, adaptation, imitation and adoption of technologies that are new to a specific context". Barnett (2005) suggests that "working with and re-working existing knowledge, rather than generating new knowledge, is the dominant activity in innovation". Since the definition of innovation is understood, two models of innovation will be presented in the coming sections. <fnote>Based on Dosi G. 'The Nature of the Innovative Process'. In: Soete L. Technical Change and Economic Theory (Pinter Publishers, London, 1988, p222). </fnote><heading>Transfer of Technology - a linear model of innovation</heading>Transfer of technology is defined by Brooks (1966) cited by Reddy (1991:5) as "the process by which science and technology are diffused throughout human activity". The technology transfer (from the North to the South, from International to National, from research to extension to farmer) was highly used after the green revolution, which aimed to increase food production and improve strains of wheat, rice, maize and other cereals in the 1960s. When extension was designed, it focused on spreading knowledge from universities and/or centres of excellence, to farmers, emphasising the TOT mode. The literature suggests that technology transferred from developed to developing countries faces several limitations, as developing countries often cannot utilize the technology properly, for presenting a lack of socio-economic conditions to do so. The same theory can apply on transferring technology from research centres to farmers. The top-down approach used in the past, and still present in our days, was identified as a linear model of innovation, focusing on an instrumental/persuasive way of transferring a new technology. As illustrated in Figure 1, the linear model of innovation indicates that innovation originates from scientists, who utilize communication workers (also called extension workers) to transfer it to farmers, being a "directional line between science and practice" (Leeuwis, 2004:135). <figure/>The linear model shown above suggests that basic science leads to applied science, which causes innovation and wealth. According to Arnold and Bell (2001), this 'technology push' or 'science push' idea is mistaken, as policies based on this model tend therefore to be counter-productive. Within the linear model, scientists claim to transfer ideas to farmers, but the other way round is also valid, as often scientists contribute from farmers' ideas, as suggested by Chambers in Chambers et al (1998:5). The author shares his experience when working for the International Potato Centre (CIP) in Peru, where the technology the scientists learned came from farmers, when scientists observed farmer practice in Kenya, Nepal and Peru. The literature suggests that the technology transfer approach targets middle to large farmers, or so called 'early adopters', as farmers in this category are in a better position to take risks in case of failure, have better access to information/education or are equipped with proper resources to adopt or try a new technology (see Biggs, 1989) . Transfer-of-technology (TOT) model is linked to formal Research and Development (R&D) in farming system, excluding resource-poor farmers, who do not benefit from formal research and extension. Chambers and Ghildyal (1985) suggests that the "criterion of excellence" is not on developing a research in a station or in a laboratory, or even targeting rich farmers, the real challenge is on spreading new practices among the resource-poor farmers. Issues related to the sustainability of TOT mode have been highly discussed. The literature indicates that the technology introduced is generally adapted and modified, and the spread of the technology is a "powerful indicator of its appropriateness, profitability and probable sustainability" (CIDA, 2003). In our days, the concepts of TOT have been changing and transfer is seen more as exchanging that really transferring technology. From a research done by CIDA in Brazil, with Brazilians and Canadians, interesting elements of the technology transfer came out, not necessarily being 'technological' aspects, as shown in Figure 2. <figure/>From the research done by CIDA in Brazil, it was suggested the change of terms, from Technology Transfer to Knowledge & Experience Exchange Partnership Program (KEEP). Hoekman et al (2004) suggest that international technology transfer (ITT) is important when considering economic development and the acquisition and diffusion of such technology expects to have a growth in productivity. But who are those technologies targeting? Are those technologies available to resource-poor-farmers, who do not benefit from formal research and extension, and who are responsible for approximately 60% of global agriculture, and produce 15-20% of the world food (Francis, 1986)? Clearly not. Nevertheless, agricultural technology transfer is in the agenda of many internal donors, such as the World Bank, which has just released a credit of US$100 million to China to help finance a project which aimed to test innovative models for agricultural technology generation, transfer, and application; which is expected to generate additional farm income in China. <fnote>Source:  URL :20471139~menuPK:282869~pagePK:64020865~piPK:149114~theSitePK:282823,00.html </fnote>In this context of innovation, communication is seen as a step forward when dealing with technology, development, improving livelihood and poverty reduction, specially in developing countries, as presented in the following section. <heading>Communication - an interactive model for innovation</heading>In the context of rural extension, communication is used as an interactive model for innovation, where knowledge flows in rural areas as a basic resource. Communication is seen as a tool for collaboration between those who have knowledge and those who can benefit from it (see Hoekman et al, 2004), seeking to improve their lives on their own way, being able to make appropriate decisions and improve their well-being (see Jones and Rolls, 1982:2). In this context, communication plays an important role in facilitating the information exchange between extension workers/researchers and the beneficiaries. The study done by Rosario-Braid (1981) shows clearly the old paradigm, where the author indicates that much attention had been given to the training of extension workers in technology transfer, but not enough attention were given to the mechanisms which enable the extension agents to transfer and multiply his/her skills and knowledge. With the re-think of the uses of communication for rural innovation, the Figure 3 shows the approaches used from a linear to an interactive model. <fnote>According to Oxford English Dictionary (1989), communication is the imparting, conveying, or exchange of ideas, knowledge, and information. </fnote><table/>In this context, communication (horizontal and bottom-up) plays an important role in "providing information, forums and mechanisms of interaction" for redistribution of resources (see Rosario-Braid, 1981:2-3). Being innovation the result of an interactive process between many actors, including companies, universities and research institutes, communication is essential, as individual organisations rarely possess all the knowledge necessary for the whole process of innovation (see Dantas, 2005). As a result, extension workers need to combine scientific, design, engineering and operational knowledge from different sources, altering the extension practices being carried on for decades. As seen earlier, "innovation does not follow a linear path that begins with research, moves through the processes of development, design and engineering, and production, and ends with the successful introduction of new products and processes. Rather, it tends to involve continuous feedback loops between the different stages" (Dantas, 2005). Following this theory, Barnett (2005) argues that innovation suggests a network of actors that provide communication channels linking organizations and individuals. Still according to Barnett, the networks can be both formal and informal, being informal links very important, as such links foster trust between the various parties. This results in both parties knowing each other's needs, and knowing the nature and quality of the goods and services on offer, reducing risks and transaction costs of the interactions. <heading>What are the implications for extension practices? </heading>The ToT model of extension emphasizes the technical knowledge of the extension worker, being able to 'convince' the users to adopt such technology. While the communication to support innovation approach emphasizes the way information flows in the process, structure and network of institutes to change and develop its capacity to deliver a service (see Hall et al 2005b). Agricultural professionals, according to the literature, should not focus on agricultural science and technology knowledge sources, but instead, they should pay more attention to the behaviour of the system that produces this knowledge. Often transfer of technology is seen as a response for development, and development is seen as assuring the existence of elements of an infrastructure. Unfortunately, less attention has been given to the ways in which particular facilities have been used and to the "ability of people to use and benefit from them" (Jones and Rolls, 1982:2). The literature also indicates that technological change is seen as the heart of social and economic change, but in the other hand, innovation (and thus social and economic change) results from both technological and institutional development. The extension practices currently used by developing countries follows a model of industrialized countries. During a recent presentation in India, Professor Andy Hall illustrated the general features of agricultural innovation systems, as presented in Figure 4. <table/>As indicated in the Figure 4, the extension practices, undertaken in the past by industrialized countries, are not suitable for the actual needs of developing countries, in order to eliminate poverty and bring development, in a sustainable way. The extension practice will have to be adjusted according to resources available in developing countries to match the innovation perspective. The main issue related to those changes in extension practices is related to investment in human capital, where professionals need to learn how to work in partnership, changing behaviour and attitudes towards users and providers. Barnett (2005) suggests that the "success of innovation relies hugely on the 'framework conditions' - in other words policies, laws, rules, and other cultural aspects - and the basic infrastructure of the system". The author also indicates that the innovation approach needs investments not only in the research that generates knowledge, "but in the quality and effectiveness of the pipe, and in the processes, mechanisms and institutions that will use the knowledge once it emerges". <heading>Conclusion</heading>The study concludes that since the linear model of innovation has proved inefficient to fulfil the needs of farmers and those involved in the food chain process, specially the poor-resource farmers, an interactive model emerged in a tentative to empower rural communities to make better decisions and determine the framework for the agriculture and rural development sector, in a participatory way. Based on this study, innovation is seen as an interaction among multiple stakeholders, where perspectives are shared and knowledge flows through interactive learning. The process, rather than the content is emphasized and innovation plays a crucial role in the process, which brings concepts and ideas of behaviour and attitudes towards agricultural science and those involved in the process. Communication, being the tool to support the innovation process in rural extension, should be encouraged in any stage of planning, monitoring, evaluation and impact assessment of agricultural projects in order to achieve sustainability and improve livelihood or rural communities. 