<list></list><heading>Introduction</heading><quote>In a world where every aspect of life is increasingly dependent upon scientific & technological progress, promoting capacity-building and education in science and technology is indispensable for all nations not only to achieve sustainable development but also to create a scientifically and technologically literate citizenry in the interests of ensuring true democracy (UNESCO Website). </quote>In this context, the present study aims to briefly revise the literature on adult education and critically analyse the current learning approach adopted by ISNAR, a division of IFPRI, since the organization "seeks to foster policy, institutional, and organizational change to enhance the impact of innovations on food security, poverty reduction, economic growth, and sustainable development" (IFPRI's Website). <fnote>ISNAR, a non-profit organization, was established in 1979 by the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), on the basis of recommendations from an international task force. ISNAR was officially closed as an independent organization in April 2004. But, as several projects were very well evaluated in terms of performance and relevance, and were still fully funded, an alliance with a sister organization called IFPRI was approved by both Board of Trustees. </fnote>Learning and Capacity Strengthening (LCS) is one of the programmes carried out by ISNAR Division and seeks to generate <fnote>In this study, the term capacity building will be replaced by capacity strengthening, as it is understood that the capacity of adults should be strengthened and not built. </fnote><quote>new knowledge in collaboration with partners and strengthens the capacity of individuals and institutions in food and agricultural innovation systems, universities, and government agencies so that they promote sustainable options for reducing hunger and poverty (IFPRI's Website).</quote>The following sections of this study will give an overview of the existing learning approaches, the current approach undertaken by ISNAR and suggestions for improving it. <heading>Why Adult Education? </heading>"Adult Education is the field of educational science (pedagogics) that involves the conceptualisation and research of adult education and learning" (Arnold, 2005:7). Adult education is an integral part of life-long education and can contribute decisively to economic and cultural development, social progress and world peace, as well as the development of educational systems (Townsend Coles, 1977:158). According to Arnold (2005:9), adult education deals with the (1) fundamentals (theories); (2) development (history); (3) need as well as contents, and processes (didactics); (4) the ways and forms of learning (methodology); (5) the individual learners ("learning subjects") with their biographical, socio-psychological and socio-cultural background as well as their respective adult learning acquisition and interpretation models (psychology of adult-age learning, adult socialisation research); (6) the addressed and target groups (research on environment/milieu target learners and participants); (7) the legal and institutional status of adult education; and the (8) general framework conditions and development trends in further education policies and at the international level. The capacity strengthening programme of ISNAR offers short-term learning courses on agricultural research management issues, targeting mature professionals (adults) with high education, working on the private or public sector, mainly in developing countries. Its programmes are in line with the world's demand for capacity strengthening projects, as indicated by UNESCO. When UN designed the Millennium Development Goals (MDG), it did not explicitly indicated adult education, but without empowering the policy-makers, national professionals, and researchers, the goals will not be achieved. One of the main donors for educational projects, the World Bank, has been currently funding 157 projects on education, in 83 countries, committing US$33 billion in loans and credits for education. It includes primary education, formal/informal education, long life learning, short and long term training. The literature shows that there is a consensus about investing in education as a way to bring development, improve livelihood and reduce poverty. <fnote>The MDG are (1) eradicate extreme poverty and hunger, (2) achieve universal primary education, (3) promote gender equality and empower women, (4) reduce child mortality, (5) improve maternal health, (6) combat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and other diseases, (7) ensure environment sustainability, and (8) develop a global partnership for development. </fnote><fnote>Source :  URL  </fnote><heading>Adult Didactics</heading><heading>Learning Concepts</heading>According to Dohmen (2001) cited by Arnold (2005:39), learning can be defined as the <quote>competence-building acquisition of knowledge, capacities, and skills. It takes place not only intentionally (intentional learning) but also incidentally (functional or "en passant" learning), and not only in the institutional context of a school, training facility, university, etc. (formal learning), but also in real-life practice (informal learning). </quote><heading>Andragogy vs Pedagogy<fnote> Source: Conner, M. L. "Andragogy and Pedagogy." Ageless Learner, 1997-2004.  URL </fnote></heading>According to Conner (1995), pedagogy literally means the art and science of educating children and often is used as a synonym for teaching. More accurately, pedagogy represents teacher-focused education. In the pedagogic model, teachers assume responsibility for making decisions about what will be learned, how it will be learned, and when it will be learned. Teachers direct learning. Andragogy, initially defined as "the art and science of helping adults learn", has taken on a broader meaning since the first publications. The term currently defines an alternative to pedagogy and refers to learner-focused education for people of all ages. The androgenic model asserts that five issues be considered and addressed in formal learning. They include (1) letting learners know why something is important to learn, (2) showing learners how to direct themselves through information, and (3) relating the topic to the learners' experiences. In addition, (4) people will not learn until they are ready and motivated to learn. Often this (5) requires helping them overcome inhibitions, behaviours, and beliefs about learning. <heading>Learning Theories</heading>The literature identifies four theories of learning, which are behavioural, cognitive, constructivist and subject-scientific (Arnold, 2005:40-2), as presented in Table 1. Behavioural learning theories Assume that human beings develop or modify their behaviour through stimulus-response. Robert Gagné (1969) cited by Arnold (2005:40) indicated that "stimulus-response learning is just one of the many ways of learning with which individuals acquire information and develop competencies". He identified a total of eight ways of learning: (1) signal learning, (2) stimulus-response learning, (3) motor chain learning, (4) verbal chain learning, (5) discrimination learning, (6) concept learning, (7) rule learning, and (8) problem solving. Cognitive learning theories Assume that learning is a process which involves action throughout the sequence of planning, execution and monitoring, emphasizing the problem-solving aspect of learning. Constructivist learning theories Assume that teaching cannot generate a stock of knowledge or develop competencies in others; it can only stimulate and facilitate restructuring or acquisition processes. Subject-based learning theories Present an individualistic learning concept, where learning is seen from the perspective of the subject, while objective contexts (demands, stimuli, etc.) are completely excluded. Table 1 - Theories of Learning The theories presented above ignore many of the learning efforts and processes that really develop competencies in young and adults. Arnold (2005) argues that "the analysis and theoretical interpretation of learning still has to deal to a great extent with the informal and self-guided learning processes in daily life, in the work environment and in real-life practice have to be addressed more intensively". As indicated by Kolb (1984:28), learning is a "continuous process grounded in experience". <heading>Adult Learners</heading>As indicated by Arnold (2005), a recent empirical study on courses in adult vocational training institutions determined five types of adult learners, as indicated in Table 2. The Theoretician Learners: who enjoy learning, are reliable, confident, and have concrete ideas as to what they want to learn. They are not only interested in the practical application but also in the theoretical basis. They like to learn and learn well from texts. When they acquire something new, they make an effort to understand the interrelationships. The Practical Application-oriented: Learners are always guided by the question regarding what they can do with the new contents. Theories and pure factual knowledge are not enough. Difficulties arise when there is a lack of illustrations and when the learning contents are presented in a theoretical manner. The Model Student: Learners are ambitious, hard-working and studious; they learn in order to get good marks, certificates and diplomas. Type 3 learners prefer guided learning to autonomous learning; they prefer to have contents explained to them rather than to have to figure out things on their own. They find it difficult to learn, particularly in situations in which there is no definite solution. The Indifferent: Learners only learn what is essential for life. They do not have any distinct likings or particular disliking, everything seems equally right (or wrong) to them. They encounter difficulties, although these do not arouse their ambition nor are they a cause for agitation, nervousness or self-doubt. The Unconfident: Learners assume that they will encounter numerous difficulties in their learning process and that they probably will not understand many things. They therefore restrict themselves to retaining the major contents as best they can. They view difficulties as the result of their lack of capacity, they react with agitation and nervousness. Table 2 - Types of Adult Learners (Arnold, 2005:50) <heading>Teaching Methods and Techniques</heading>There are several methods to facilitate the teaching-learning processes and the facilitator will have to select what is the most suitable method for a particular situation. As described by Galbraith (1998), Table 3 shows some samples of adult education teaching methods. <fnote>The philosophy of adult education adopted in this study is the humanistic. The teacher is seen as a facilitator who promotes the learning, but does not direct it (Galbraith, 1998:71) </fnote><table/>All the methods and techniques presented above have advantages and limitations. It is important to determine when to use those techniques, showing the responsibilities of teachers and learners. <heading>Current Learning Approach undertaken by ISNAR<fnote> Source:  URL </fnote></heading>The learning approach currently used by ISNAR is the training-of-trainers (ToT) approach, which is based on experiential learning theory (Kolb and Fry, 1975; McCaffery, 1986) and is participatory in design. It is a learner-centred approach involving active experience followed by a process of reviewing, reflecting, and applying what has been learned through the experience. <heading>Applying the experiential learning cycle</heading>This experiential and participatory approach was chosen by ISNAR to "enhance effective skill transfer, to facilitate conceptual and attitudinal development, and to encourage appropriate changes in participants' behaviour" (França, 1994). The literature indicates that the experiential learning cycle is especially useful for skill training because most of its techniques are active and designed to involve the participants in practicing the skill. The experiential model helps people assume responsibility for their own learning as it asks them to reflect on their experience, draw conclusions, and identify applications. Participants ground the lessons in their actual work environment by considering the question, 'what can or should I do differently as a result of this training experience?' According to the literature, for this model to be effective, it must be applied in both the design and delivery stages of training. When designing the learning materials, the sessions, activities, and notes should guide trainers on reaching the training objectives by applying the experiential training methodology. An understanding of the adult learner, the role of the trainer as a facilitator, and the experiential learning cycle are important in this approach. <heading>The adult learner in ISNAR's approach</heading>Understanding the adult learner is critical to the success of the training approach. The adult learner has particular needs (Arnold, 2005; França, 1994; Rogers, 2002), as they need to recognize the relevance of their learning in terms of their own lives, they need self-directed learning opportunities in which they can actively participate, and they need to actively think, do, and reflect on experiences, discuss with others, and practice and learn new skills. The adult learner needs interactive communication with both the trainer and fellow learners, which is different from one-way teacher-to-student communication. The learner needs to continually reassess the question, 'Where am I now and where do I want to go?' (França, 1994). <heading>The experiential learning cycle<fnote> This section on the experiential learning cycle is adapted from USDA/OICD/ITD. (no date). Agricultural trainer development: Training of trainers. Instructors' manual, and J.A. McCaffery, 1986. Interdependent effectiveness: A reconsideration of cross-cultural orientation and training International Journal of Intercultural Relations. </fnote></heading>França (1994), the education specialist of ISNAR, argues that e xperiential training or learning is a "phrase often heard in the educational world. The strength of the approach is in the completeness of its cycle, which consists of four stages, each as important as the one that comes before or after. The four stages are (1) experience, (2) process, (3) generalization, and (4) application." Kolb and Fry (1975) indicates that the "learning cycle can begin at any one of the four points - and that it should really be approached as a continuous spiral". Experiential learning is the processes of letting people participate in a presentation, having a question and answer session after a lecture, or a role play or case study without the subsequent steps of the model. The stages of the experiential learning cycle are outlined in Figure 1. <figure/>Table 4 illustrates the four stages proposed by Kolb and Fry (1995), but in ISNAR's context. Experience This phase is structured to enable learners to "do" something. "Doing" includes a range of activities, such as participating in a case study, role play, simulation, or game, or listening to a lecture, watching a film or slide show, practicing a skill, or completing an exercise. Process In this stage, learners reflect on the activity undertaken during the experience stage. They share their reactions in a structured way with other members of the group. They may speak individually, in small groups, or as a full training group. They discuss both their intellectual and attitudinal (cognitive and affective) reactions to the activities in which they have engaged. The trainer helps the learners think critically about the experience and verbalize their feelings and perceptions and also draws attention to any recurrent themes or patterns that appear in the learner' reactions. The trainer must also help the learners conceptualize their reflections so they can move towards drawing conclusions. Generalization In the generalization stage, the learners form conclusions and generalizations that might be derived from, or stimulated by, the first two phases of the cycle. The trainer helps learners think critically in order to draw conclusions that might generally or theoretically apply to "real life." This stage is best symbolized by the following questions: 'What did you learn from all this?' and 'What more general meaning does this have for you?' Application After learners have formed some generalizations, the trainer/teacher must guide the learners into the application stage. Drawing upon the insights and conclusions reached during the generalization stage (and previous stages), learners can begin to incorporate what they have learned into their lives by developing plans for more effective behaviour in the future. Techniques used to facilitate the application stage can include action plans, reviewing each other's action plans, formulating ideas for action, sharing action plans with the whole group, and identifying additional learning needs. The trainer/teacher assists during this process by helping learners to be as specific as possible. Table 4 - Stages of Experiential Learning Cycle <fnote>Adapted from ISNAR (1997) </fnote><heading>Participant action plan approach</heading>According to França (1994), "an integral aspect of the workshop delivered by ISNAR is the ultimate application of the skills learned by the participants in the work environment". The participant action plan approach (PAPA) was developed by the United States Office of Personnel Management to help participants of short term training to apply lessons learned during training to their job sites. Participants reflect on and list possible actions based on their new knowledge, at the end of the workshop, leaving the event with a concrete plan to be implemented, when resources are available. PAPA thus reaches the application stage of the experiential learning cycle. The sections presented above illustrate what approaches are currently being undertaken by ISNAR, since 1994. But as shown in the next section, the experimental learning approach receives critiques from education specialists world wide. <heading>Critique of Current Approach<fnote> Source:  URL  and  URL </fnote></heading>The current approach undertaken by ISNAR is entirely based on the experimental learning proposed by Kolb. But not all writers agree with Kolb's theory. Rogers, for example points out that "learning includes goals, purposes, intentions, choice and decision-making, and it is not at all clear where these elements fit into the learning cycle" (Rogers, 1996:108). According to Jeffs and Smith (1999), a number of criticisms can be made of the Kolb model. It pays insufficient attention to the process of reflection (see Boud et al 1985); the claims made for the four different learning styles are extravagant (Jarvis 1987; Tennant 1997); the model takes very little account of different cultural experiences/conditions; the idea of stages or steps does not sit well with the reality of thinking (Dewey 1933); and the empirical support for the model is weak (Jarvis 1987; Tennant 1997). Loynes (1998) indicates that Kolb's theory is based on research measuring the non-conscious development of psycho-motor skills. According to the author, the evidence that other kinds of learning follow this pattern is weak. Even thou the current approach undertaken by ISNAR receive critiques from the literature, the approach has been successfully disseminated among researchers from developing world, as one of the most successful approach in the CGIAR, based on its capacity to develop skills among the workshop participants. Based on its training-of-trainers methodology, the skills gained can be disseminated at low costs within several developing countries organization. The phase beyond the ToT workshop requires some considerations, as indicated in the next section. <heading>Suggestions for Improvement</heading>The final stage of experimental cycle, 'application' is often left out by ISNAR when designing the programmes. As a result, the power of experiential learning is significantly diminished or negated altogether. In other to be more effective, ISNAR will need to work closely with the trainees when they return to their own environment, supporting the implementation of the PAPA and the phase beyond the ToT workshop. The implications or constraints for such action will be mainly personnel time and costs. ISNAR will need to identify subject matter specialists, on the topic the trainee was trained on, and organize visits to the trainee region, for face-to-face interaction. Through those close interaction, it is expected that the trainee will be empowered to make her/his own decisions when applying a new knowledge and the process can be institutionalized and sustainable. However there are investments in education, the stigma that short term training are exclusively an opportunity to networking, in order words, to bring professional from different places to have 'a good time', is still strong. There is a need to change the attitudes and behaviour of professionals linked to training and capacity strengthening, in order to raise awareness of the importance of developing skills among professionals and change curriculum at university and vocational training level for improving life conditions of poor countries. 