<heading>1) Description of Preservation:</heading>The preservation of this skeleton is good. All bones appear to be present, although the sternum is shattered and the long bones are missing their ends with the exception of the radius and the ulna of both arms. The metacarpals, metatarsals and phalanges of the hands and feet seem to be present. The fibula in the left leg is broken, post mortem, although all the parts are present. The Pelvis and sacrum have been well preserved, however the right pubis has separated from the Ilium. There are 25 loose vertebrae, with the top of the cervical vertebrae fused to the atlas. There are 12 pairs of ribs, most of which are intact but many seem to have been fractured and healed, or this may be a result of a congenital condition relating to the fused cervical vertebrae. Both the left and right clavicles are preserved as well as the Scapulas. The skull and mandible are intact and well preserved however there are only 17 out of a possible 32 teeth. The majority of these are loose and have a great degree of attrition and uneven wear. <heading>2) Sex Estimate:</heading>In order to provide a sex estimate for this skeleton we had to look at the Skull, Pelvis and metrical data and form an opinion based upon these combined results. <heading>Skull:</heading>We looked at nine different aspects of the skull and ranked them from very male to possible male, indeterminate, possible female and very female. These observations were based on a series of images provided by Walker (1994). We found the skull to be mostly male with some indeterminate features. First we looked at the Nuchral Crest, which is located at the dorsal side of the skull. We found this to be possible male as it was defined but not extremely. The orbital margins were male as they were quite smooth and not sharply defined. The mastoid process was male as it was large and almost vertically downwards. However, the Supraorbital Ridges were indeterminate as they were visible but only slight and the Gonial angle of the mandible was indeterminate. The chin shape was also indeterminate as there was a slight mental eminence but it wasn't a largely square jaw. <heading>Pelvis:</heading>The Pelvis was looked at in a similar way to the Skull, using the Phenice Method (1969). We had to look at different aspects of the Ilium, Pubis and Ischium and grade them from male to female. Overall the sex estimate from the pelvis was male. The sub-pubic angle was small and the sub-pubic concavity was not concave, indicating a male. There was further a broad medial surface on the ischio-pubic ramus and the sciatic notch was defined and therefore male. The only indeterminate feature was the sacrum which was neither hugely curved, as in a male, nor flat as in a female. <heading>Metrical Data:</heading>We used callipers to measure the Humerus, Scapula and Femur. We couldn't measure the maximum length of any of the long bones due to the ends being lost in excavation, nor the length of the sternum dut to this being shattered. The Humerus' vertical diameter head was measured at 50.3mm. This is indicative of a Caucasian male (>47mm). We measured the Glenoid Cavity length of the Scapula and found this to be 40.06mm, again indicative of a male (>37mm). Lastly we measured the vertical diameter of the Femur head, which was 47.5mm which is right on the edge of indeterminate and male. The sex estimate of the individual based on these measurements was male. The overall estimation of the sex of this individual based on the Skull, Pelvis and Metrical data was male. <heading>Age Estimate:</heading>An age estimate was achieved through looking at the skull, dentition, sternal rib ends and pelvis. <heading>Skull:</heading>To age the individual using the skull we had to look at the cranial suture closure. These sutures generally close as we age, however this is not always true. Our skeleton had all the sutures visible and many open. This may have been related to the congenital condition mentioned earlier. Firstly we had to choose which side of the skull we were going to examine and then assign points to each suture depending upon whether is was open (0); minimal closure (1); significant closure (2) or obliteration (3). We chose to examine the lateral-anterior suture closure, so we assigned points to each of the sutures and then added them up. Using the table 'after Meindi and Lovejoy 1985' we then used our points total to find a mean age and an age range. The mean age was 56.2 and the range was given as 34-68 years. <heading>Dentition:</heading>Using the teeth to provide an age estimate meant that first we had to place all remaining teeth in the sockets and examine the extent of the dentine exposure and wear on the first, second and third molars. The dentine exposure patterns on our individuals first, second and third molars were consistent with the category for 33-45 years: They had a large extent of dentine exposure on them and some teeth had very unequal wear. We only had one third molar which was impacted and coming out the buccal side. This was in good condition as you wouldn't expect to see wear on it. <heading>Rib Ageing:</heading>If the sternal ends of your individuals' ribs are intact then these can be used to provide an age estimate. For this method you should ideally use the 4 th rib; however this is often difficult to identify so the 3 rd to 5 th are considered suitable. The probable 4 th rib of our individual was located and so we used this to compare with the casts provided to give an age estimate. His rib was a closest match to the cast M5a, which gave an age range of 33-42. This corresponds well with his dentition ageing and also not badly with the skull. <heading>Pelvis:</heading>There are two aspects of the pelvis to look at when making an age estimate. The first is the Pubic Symphysis. This scheme was developed by Todd, TW (1921) and a summary table was further developed by Byers, SN (2002). Our individuals pubic surface had a granular appearance, with very few, if any, ridges and furrows. His ventral margin had a complete rampart and the dorsal margin had a complete plateau. His upper and lower extremeties were also continuing to form. These all correspond to an age estimate of 30-40 years, which again corresponds well with out other estimates. The second aspect we looked at with the pelvis was the Auricular surface. This was developed by Meindle RS and Lovejoy CO (1989) and again the table was developed by Byers SN (2002). We found that the transverse organisation of the auricular surface had very few billows and striae, which both decrease with age. The granularity was going from granular to dense and there was marked apical activity. The retroauricular area had possible slight activity and there was some micro porosity. This information gave an age range from 30 - 60. However, the majority of the findings were from ages 30 - 44. Our age estimates were all fairly in line with one another. The youngest age estimate was 30 and the oldest 60 but the majority of the ranges were from around 35-45 years. This gives an age category of middle-mature adult. <heading>Stature Estimate: </heading>To get a stature estimation for our individual we had to measure the long bones and, using a formula based on his age, sex and race, calculate his stature. Our individual was missing most of the ends of his long bones and so we had to use the Ulna and the Radius to provide an estimate. We did have the end of one of his Femurs, however is was unattached so we used this, attached as accurately as possible, to see if it corresponded with our ulna and radius results. <heading>Ulna : </heading>This was measured as 25.5 cm. When put into the formula (3.7*ulna + 74.05) it gave a stature estimation of 166.33 ± 4.32 cm. <heading>Radius : </heading>This was measured as 23.1cm. When put into the formula (3.78*rad + 79.01) it gave a stature estimation of 168.40 ± 4.32 cm. <heading>Femur : </heading>This was measured as 43.6cm. When put into the formula (2.38*fem + 61.41) it gave a stature estimation of 165.18 ± 3.27 cm. The average stature estimation is therefore 166.64 ± 3.98cm which gives a maximum average of 170.62cm and a minimum average of 162.66cm. <heading>Summary:</heading>This individual is well preserved and has nearly all the bones present. From looking at various parts of the skeleton and their growth and wear patterns it appears that this individual is male, with a middle-mature adult age range of 35-45 years and a stature of 166.64cm. <heading>Diary:</heading><heading>Practical session 1:</heading>The first hour of this session was a lecture on the human skeleton. We learnt about the functions of the skeleton; that it is a living organism (when we are alive), and about the different parts to it and the various cells that maintain it such as osteocytes, osteoblasts and osteoclasts. During the next two hours we were assigned a skeleton and had to lay it out correctly. This was difficult as there are so many parts! Luckily there was a hanging skeleton cast that we could use for guidance. We learnt how the different bones articulate with one another and that it should be laid out as if it were lying on its back with palms facing up, so the lower arm bones aren't crossed. We also learnt about the different types of teeth and where they go in the mouth. Some peoples' skeletons have most teeth still attached but our skeletons teeth seem to be badly decayed and are mostly loose. On the other hand ours is well preserved and has what looks like all the bones, which many others seem not to have. He does have strange aspects like a vertebrae attached to his atlas. <heading>Practical session 2:</heading>In this session we didn't have a lecture as there was no OHP so we had a short talk about how to sex our skeleton using the skull, pelvis and measuring areas of bones. Then we had to lay out our skeleton again which wasn't too bad as I remembered what we did the week before. Our skull was hard to sex as lots of aspects were indeterminate or we weren't really sure what we were looking for so we had to ask for help quite a lot in identifying different parts. We found that it is a male. We had the same kind of problems with the pelvis but once it was explained to you it became a lot clearer. We also came up with a stature estimate by measuring various bones and putting them into formulas. We had to use arm bones for this which aren't as good as leg bones but all our leg bones had the ends broken off so were unreliable. We still got one leg bone estimate but only to back up our arm bone ones. <heading>Practical session 3: </heading>In this hour lecture we learnt about how to get an age estimate for our individual. When put into practice in the next two hours this was difficult when looking at the pelvis and ribs as we often weren't sure what the tables we were using as a reference were referring to and so we had to get help. The skull sutures were quite easy to use and so were the teeth. Luckily all our different aspects corresponded with one another and gave an estimate of 35-45 years. <heading>Practical session 4: </heading>For this weeks lecture we learnt about skeletal pathology, including bone pathology and dental disease, there was also lots of terminology. For the next hour we laid out our skeleton and looked at his teeth and signs of dental disease. Many of his teeth were missing and there was evidence of an abscess on the upper left pre molars. There is also a caries on the lower right canine and a 3 rd molar erupting into the jaw on the right maxilla. He also has big gaps between his canines on his mandible which may be related to a congenital disease also seen by the fusion of his top cervical vertebrae to his atlas and the fracturing of many of his ribs. 