<heading>1. Introduction</heading>Why do consumers chose what they chose and by what they buy? Researchers have identified a number of criteria that are used by people while making their purchase decisions. Among those factors most frequently mentioned are price, brand and store name as well as country of product origin. The question that the following research attempts to answer is how important the abovementioned external product attributes are to consumers from various socio-economic backgrounds, when they shop at Marks and Spencer (M&S). The survey is based on 23 questions, designed to be easy to answer as responses should be rapid and spontaneous. The survey asks about peoples perception of intangible phenomena, therefore the semantic differential was predominantly used in order to allow respondents to express intensity of their positive or negative attitudes. The nature of questions and the quota sampling fit the survey method selected for this study, namely the computer assisted mall-intercept, where the time of questionnaire completion is a crucial factor. The paper is structured as follows: section 2 contains a brief review of the literature related to the subject of customer's choice determinants; section 3 presents the proposed interviewing strategy followed by a basic cost analysis; while section 4 validates the choice of a sampling method. The developed questionnaire is placed in an appendix at the very end if the document. <heading>2. Price, brand, product origin and store name: how much do they matter? </heading><heading>Price</heading>East, (1997) states, that price can inform the consumer about the good, and specifically of its quality, however, Engel (1995) claims that the importance of price as evaluative criterion is often overestimated. To prove this point he quotes research, in which supermarket shoppers were asked the price of an item they had just placed in their shopping basket and less than a half of them could do so. East (1997) explains that customers' problems to recall prices result from the increasing number of promotions, brands and greater affluence that make prices less important than before. Further, East (1997) presents some of the older research by Stoetzel (1954), who suggested, that consumers have an acceptable price range with upper and lower limits. When the price is beyond the upper limit the product is seen as too expensive. When it is too low the product quality may be questioned. Thus to be purchased the product must fall within the acceptable price range. East (1997) also claims, that customers more concerned about price usually pay less attention to the brand of a product. <heading>Brand name</heading>The literature gives very simple answer to the question, how much does the brand matter: the customers like brands that meet their needs and wants well. If they have a positive usage experience, will seek that reward again. (Sheth et al, 1999), and develop the so-called brand loyalty. The above-mentioned concept has been described from various standpoints by numerous authors (Engel (1995); East (1997)), quoting exhaustively research dating back to early 50s. However Sheth (1999) putts the case most clearly. He states, that customer loyalty is a customer's commitment to a brand or a store, based on a strong favourable attitude and manifested in consistent purchasing behaviour. He argues that there are two ways to think of brand loyalty: brand loyalty as behaviour (what brands people buy) and as an attitude (how they feel about brands. True loyalty incorporates both aspects. East (1997) states that people may like a brand, but not purchase it through lack of opportunity. They may also purchase without any feeling for the brand (e.g. sugar). Analysis also suggests that often brand is not a cause of the purchase, but vice versa, when shoppers buy easily available brands and in consequence start liking them. As Engel (1995) puts it, 'the brand name appears to serve as a surrogate indicator of product quality' and in this respect can also be seen as status symbol. Moreover, Sheth (1999), claims that people tend to identify emotionally with brands and see them as part of themselves. <heading>Store name</heading>At which grocery store do you shop? Do you shop there regularly or occasionally? Why do you shop there rather than at other stores? Are they less convenient? More expensive? Those numerous questions come from extensive study 'Consumer behaviour and beyond', by Sheth (1999) and are exhaustively answered there. The number one factor in store choice is location. However, sometimes customers will go to a distant store, if they get better quality or selection or price (Sheth, 1999). Store loyalty depends also on how favourable the shopping experience is in a particular store, which is determined by: (1) the quality of service (2) in-store display; and (3) atmosphere (Sheth, 1999). Important for this study is the fact that East (1997) mentions Marks and Spencer as a store credited with strong drawing power. According to this author M&S offers a product range or standard of service that is not easily found in other stores. Another attraction for the customer is store brands. Their exclusive availability may be one more source of customer's loyalty (Sheth, 1999), what could be the case as far as Marks and Spencer is concerned. <heading>Country of product origin</heading>More than twelve years ago, Okechuku (1994), investigated the importance of the product origin to consumers in the United States, Canada, Germany and The Netherlands. This feature was found to be one of the three most important in preference evaluation. Respondents in each country preferred domestically-made products, followed by products made in other developed countries and, lastly, products made in developing countries. This approach is not unfamiliar to Australian customers nowadays. Overall 89% of respondents of a survey carried out by 'Australian Made Campaign', felt it was important to them that the goods or products they purchase are of Australian origin. Some 19% of respondents considered it "extremely important", 37% considered it "very important" and 32% considered it "important".  <fnote>'Australian Made Campaign',  URL , (31 January 2006). </fnote>Interestingly, according to the European Union legislation, linking of the product quality with its national origin is illegal as it creates basis for discrimination. <fnote>Treaty Establishing the European Community, Article 28-30, Official Journal C 325 of 24 December 2002. </fnote><heading>3. Interviewing strategy</heading><heading>Plan A: Computer assisted mall-intercept</heading>The choice of method was determined by one key variable: respondent's time. It is meant to be quick and simple, but also provide satisfactory number of data. The survey will be carried out in Marks and Spencer stores exclusively. Concealed and cosily arranged stalls with 2 computers will be located at 5 carefully selected stores, that specialise in serving certain consumer segment. Two contracted researchers will be there to assist respondents in case of any problems, such as unfamiliarity with computers, disabilities, etc. On request the printable version of questionnaire will be supplied for completion. <fnote>For more information on consumer segmentation see section 4. </fnote>Each respondent will be asked to type a password at the end of the questionnaire to be quoted in case of withdrawal form the survey. Refreshments will be offered free of charge (M&S tea, coffee and biscuits). A £5 gift vouchers will be distributed as a form of reward for co-operation and time. This incentive is introduced in order to overcome one of the methods main pitfalls - low response rate (29%). <fnote>However, Malhotra (1999, p. 188) describes this method's response rate as high. </fnote><heading>Plan B: Mail questionnaire</heading>The computer-based type of survey may repel elderly customers lacking computer skills. Therefore, if the mall-intercept would not provide at least 20% of responses from customers aged 65 and over, up to 40 letters with questionnaires would be sent to M&S customers fulfilling these criteria. The in-home survey was excluded as not safe for interviewers. In spite of the relatively high response rate the phone method was excluded as annoying for respondents. Given the project budget, phone computer assisted would limit the number of responses to c.a. 100. E-mail based survey could not generate adequate number of responses and would not allow for the control of the data collection environment. The following table presents survey cost estimation. <table/><list></list><heading>4. Sampling technique</heading>The target population is defined as follows (Malhotra, 1999): <list>Elements: male or female customers shopping for fresh products at Marks and Spencer,Sampling unit: individuals,Extent: United Kingdom,Time: year 2005.</list>The sample size is 200 and was determined by the available budget and the survey method chosen. To avoid the risk of double questioning respondents, who took part in mall-intercept survey would be asked leave their name and surname and signature while collecting the voucher and would be therefore removed from the sampling frame. Quota sampling method was selected for this study. According to Malhotra (1999) such nonprobabilistic technique can be used in conjunction with mall intercept interviews. This method is often utilised, when the interest is in the evaluation of the stimuli (e.g. advertisements, and here the importance of external product attributes in purchase decisions), than in projection the results to the entire population. However, under certain circumstances quota sampling obtains results close to conventional probability sampling. The control categories cover the 5 key target groups of customers shopping at Marks and Spencer, namely: <fnote>Information on store specialisation comes from the talk by E. Berisford, Marks and Spencer: The Consumer & The Shop. Consumer Behaviour and Food Marketing, at the University of Reading on 19th January 2006. </fnote><list>young single customers (carefrees),families with children aged under 10 (family ties 1)families with children aged 10-18 (family ties 2),customers whose children left home (freedom finders),elderly customers (golden years).</list>The target groups (quotas) are delimited on the basis of lifestyle and socio-economic criteria such as age, number of family members and income that are included in the first part of the questionnaire. In order to reduce the selection bias tight controls will be imposed on interviewers and interviewing procedure and precise guidelines will be suggested for improving the quality of quota samples. 