<heading>Introduction</heading>The 1980s witnessed a breakthrough in neural networking techniques that drew computer scientists, psychologists and linguists alike into a heated yet focussed debate on the nature of human cognition in general, and language acquisition in particular. The computing technique was called Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) and in 1986 two of its proponents, Rumelhart and McClelland, claimed to have developed a model that could emulate human performance on several cognitive tasks using a single mechanism, or non rule-based approach. This theoretical stance ran counter to that of the traditional rule-based, or symbol-manipulating processing theorists who, over the 1970s and 1980s, had produced empirical evidence that supported a dual mechanism approach for the acquisition of morphology. This essay is concerned with the extent to which Connectionism can both describe and predict the processes involved in the acquisition of the past tense form of English verbs and whether it is successful in upholding the claim that a single mechanism model is adequate to account for empirical data from development studies of morphological acquisition. This essay firstly describes the characteristics of the dual and single mechanism approaches to morphological acquisition. Then the ability of Connectionist models to account for empirical data with respect to the acquisition of regular, irregular and novel past tense forms will be discussed together with other pertinent aspects of PDP modelling techniques. Finally, the Connectionist approach is evaluated and the conclusions summarised. <heading>Dual Mechanism Theory</heading>The theoretical framework of generative grammar introduced by Chomsky in the late 1950s and subsequently developed by cognitive scientists, linguists and language philosophers, has led to the 'traditional' view that language acquisition and processing require the assumption that the child's innate language facility is endowed with principles of Universal Grammar (UG), and mechanisms that permit the extraction of grammatical rules from the systematic analysis of inputs from perceptual and behavioural experience. Pinker and Prince (1988:74) refer to such rules as "symbol-manipulating processes", and states that the mechanisms are provided by the brain's information processing capabilities. The following diagram, adapted from Plunkett (1995), illustrates a schematic representation of this dual aspect model for generating the past tense form in English. <figure/>The box on the left-hand side of the diagram represents the concept of the lexicon which, among other lexical characteristics, stores irregular past forms. As each verb is input to the system, regardless of its phonological characteristics, if a match is made to an item in this exceptions list, the appropriate irregular past form is selected for output and the regular past tense rule (add 'ed') is blocked. Otherwise, the regular input verb stem passes directly through the regular rule system. Therefore, in the adult, the dual mechanism theory proposes a memory store for irregular past verb forms and a standard past-rule mechanism for regular verbs. The consequences for this configuration on predicting the characteristics of past tense acquisition will be discussed during the course of this essay. <heading>Single Mechanism Theory</heading>The Rumelhart and McClelland (RM) 1986 PDP model differs from the dual mechanism approach in two major respects. Firstly, it claims that a single system, utilising phonological feature analysis of input items, can account for the acquisition, and adult formulation, of the past tense of both regular and irregular verbs, in the form of a neural network that directly connects input and output units. Secondly, this connectionist model contains no explicit rules, rather, the trained "network merely reflects the statistics of the featural representations of the verb forms." RM (1986:267). The challenge for RM was to demonstrate that an initially undifferentiated network could 'learn' the phonological relationships between present and past forms in order to demonstrate, within a single mechanism, the stages of a child's acquisition of past tense morphology, the characteristics of error patterns empirically observed, and the ability to produce correct transformations of regular, irregular and novel verb stems. <heading>Evaluation of the Connectionist Approach </heading>One aspect of the evaluation of the Connectionist approach relates to its ability to account for the three stages in the child's acquisition of past tense morphology as reported by Cazden (1968) and Kuczaj (1977): 1) Initial past forms of regular and irregular verbs are produced accurately. 2) The regular transformation (add 'ed') is applied to all verbs including previously correctly produced irregular forms (e.g., *goed). This phenomenon is called over-regularisation. 3) Over-regularisation decreases and eventually both regular and irregular forms are produced correctly. The effect of Stage 2 is to produce a so-called "U-shape" in the child's performance profile, which soon recovers during Stage 3 so that accuracy scores eventually asymptote at near adult performance levels. The following subsections document how successfully the RM and subsequent Connectionist models simulate these trends and the characteristics of children's past verb form error patterns. <heading>Overview of Results from RM 1986 Simulation</heading>The input regime to RM's 1986 model involved three distinct phases which were designed to emulate the three stages of the child's learning profile: <list>1) Training Phase: 10 highest frequency verbs (20% regular) in 10 trials2) Learning Phase: 410 medium frequency verbs (81% regular) in 190 trials3) Post-Learning Test Phase: 86 low frequency verbs (84% regular)</list>It was observed that the learning effect for irregular verbs achieved during the Training Phase dropped dramatically on the first trial of the Learning Phase. Since performance immediately showed a steady recovery that started to asymptote around the 140 th trial, RM claimed that this output pattern emulated the U-shape curve characteristic of the onset of Stage 2 in the child's acquisition profile. (RM, 1986:242, Figure 6). The other important finding was that the model not only identified the regular past rule, but also produced over-regularisation of irregular verbs, double pasts (e.g., *wented), and generated all the irregular categories of the past tense in English as classified by Bybee and Slobin (1982). On the face of it, the rule-less model appeared to respond to its challenge remarkably well, however, its shortcomings were considered to be so severe that it was quickly discredited as a viable alternative to the dual mechanism approach. The comments of Pinker and Prince (1988), MacWhinney and Leinbach (1991) and Plunkett (1995) are summarised below. <heading>The U-Shaped Curve:</heading>The shift from a high (80%) to low (19%) density irregular verb set between the Training and Learning Phases created an artificial U-shaped curve effect. Inflated strengthening of connections for the regular past form resulted in the over-regularisation of irregular verbs and the elevated successful regularisation of regular forms. <heading>Double-pasts:</heading>RM report that incorrect output forms, such as *ated, were produced by the application of both internal vowel modification and the regular 'ed' suffix. Pinker and Prince (1988) claim that such errors are not generated by children in this way, instead they result from a confusion between the irregular past form and the verb stem, the former of which undergoes two past form transformations. <heading>No Change Pasts:</heading>RM's model demonstrated effective treatment of verbs that show no change between the present and past especially if they end in /d/ or /t/. Pinker and Prince (1988) attribute the occurrence of fewer over-regularisations to an artefact of the phonological analysis system used that accidentally strengthens the correct transformation patterns in these cases. Furthermore, they attribute children's success in producing this past form correctly to a process of 'misperception': the final /t/ signals an already-transformed past tense form. <heading>Output not resembling human language:</heading>The phonological analysis system used by RM's model (Wickelphonology) produced some past forms so bizarre that they would not be expected to occur in human language, e.g., 'membled' for mailed, and 'toureder' for toured. Pinker and Prince (1988) claim that this type of output severely undermines the validity of the Wickelphonology system and, as a consequence, the integrity of the model's approach. <heading>Homophonic Verbs:</heading>There are a few instances in English of homophonic verbs, e.g., ring rang, wring wrung and ring ringed. On the basis of phonological input, RM's model is not able to distinguish between these three semantically different verbs. According to Pinker and Prince (1988) this is a serious shortcoming and results from the model's inability to recognise lexical identity. <heading>Generalisation to Novel Verbs:</heading>Of the 72 regular verbs used in the Post-Learning Test Phase, the pattern association process failed to produce past form solutions for 6 novel verbs (jump, pump, soak, warm, trail and glare), and overall, the performance levels in this phase of the simulation were deemed to be surprisingly low by MacWhinney and Leinbach (1991). On this basis, Pinker and Prince (1988) concluded that the model had failed to generalise the past tense transformation in English to novel verbs. <heading>A Single Model for Two Processes:</heading>The fundamental flaw that the dual mechanism proponents level at PDP modelling is the claim that a single network can handle two completely different processes effectively. Pinker and Prince (1988) insist that such a unitary system, that relies only on phonological feature decomposition, can never be viable as a model of cognition or language. They claim that "Some symbol referring to the object qua object, and some variable types referring to task-relevant classes of objects that cut across featural similarity are required." (Pinker and Prince, 1988:178). <heading>Default Mapping:</heading>In English there are between 150 and 180 irregular verbs, and as Prasada and Pinker (1993) point out, this disproportionate bias towards the regular form of the past, will always give single layer connectionist models an advantage for the past tense paradigm. Such architectures would be unable to generalise the two plural forms that exist in Arabic where the most common form is limited to noun shape (broken), and the minority form conforms more to a general rule (sound). <heading>Potential Solutions to the Shortcomings of RM 1986 Simulation</heading>Many of the shortcoming outlined above can and have been relatively rectified by the development of improved phonological analysis algorithms and multilayer architectures. MacWhinney and Leinbach (1991), using a standard phonological representation in place of the Wickelphone system, were able to eliminate several of the factors that caused stem reversal and bizarre output solutions. Multilayer architectures provide "hidden units" that act like a specialised, local, dynamic memory that deal with irregularities and sub-regularities within the input data set. These more recent developments in neural architectures also help to reduce the 'gradient/descent' problem in Connectionist models (Elman, 1993) where early errors are not eliminated but instead continue to persist due to the fact that radical, one-off correction procedures are not compatible with the design of the system. Plunkett and Marchman (1991) and (1993), using multilayer techniques, identified optimum training regime rates, and the recommended parameters for vocabulary composition (proportions of high and low 'type' / 'token' frequency verbs), as a function of vocabulary size. They also identified the proportion of regular to irregular verbs in the training set required to trigger over-regularisation in a manner that converged on the developmental data reported by Marcus et al (1992). Finally, Plunkett (1995) predicts that multilayer architectures have the potential to overcome the problem of distinguishing between the variants of homophonic verbs by utilising a non-semantic feature that will not weaken the predictive power of phonologically similar verbs. <heading>Conclusion </heading>This essay has evaluated the ability of Connectionist models to sustain their initial claim that a single mechanism approach can emulate the child's acquisition of the past tense in English. The success of the first PDP model (RM 1986) was to reveal the necessity for both improved phonological feature analysis techniques, and a multilayer architecture, to achieve results that converge convincingly on observed child data. The irony of this latter discovery is that such advances in network design (hidden units) have essentially converted the single mechanism architecture into one that could be described as exhibiting the properties of a dual mechanism. Proponents in both camps concede that the PDP exercise has significantly sharpened the quality of debate on the validity of computer-based modelling despite Pinker and Prince's (1988: 82) prophetic words that initial shortcomings were "..irremediable; or if remediable, only by copying tenets of the maligned symbolic theory." 