<heading>Introduction</heading>Modality has been discussed by philosophers, in relation to logic, for over 2,000 years and yet, as De Haan (1997) points outs, it is only since the 1960s that it has become a subject of analysis for linguists. My endeavour to find a succinct and useful definition of modality for the purposes of this essay, proved entirely fruitless. The many authoritative sources I consulted provided the following: "Modality: A term used in grammatical and semantic analysis to refer to contrasts in mood signalled by the verb and associated categories", Crystal (2003:295); "Modality is concerned with the status of the proposition that describes the event", Palmer (2001:1); "Modality is the category by which speakers express attitudes towards the event contained in the proposition", Downing and Locke (2001:381). The fact that these definitions fall short of a clear yet descriptive explanation reflect the fact that the rich texture of semantic nuances modality represents cannot be distinguished on the basis of pure grammatical form. On the contrary, the same modal expressions are employed in English to convey a vast complexity of different and even contradictory meanings, e.g., necessity, possibility, certainty, obligation, permission, willingness, ability. This essay firstly defines modality in terms of its grammatical manifestations. This is followed by an analysis of the various semantic categories that have been subsumed under the umbrella term modality. Finally, the arguments that I believe support the statement in this essay title, that modality is primarily a semantic notion, are articulated and the main conclusions are summarised. <heading>Modality as a Grammatical Notion</heading>Modality in English is syntactically represented in a variety of verbal and non-verbal forms. Quirk et al (1985), Berk (1999) and Downing and Locke (2001), identify the following verbal markers of modality: <list>Lexical verbs, e.g., think, believe, assume, deduce, allow, forbid, command, promise, want, insist, wonder, wish. Modal auxiliaries, e.g., may, might, can, could, must, ought to, shall, should, will, would and need (characterised by no 3 rd person singular inflection, interrogative and negative not do-supported, no passive voice). Semi-modal or lexico-modal auxiliaries, e.g., have got to, be bound/about/supposed/ willing to.Modal idioms, e.g., had better, would rather/sooner.Catenatives, e.g., appear/seem/happen to.Imperative Mood, e.g., Be an angel; Let's go; Somebody turn the TV off; Enjoy! Subjunctive Mood, e.g., I suggest/recommend he see a doctor; I wish I were rich; God save the Queen (items in the subjunctive are underlined).</list>Modality is also marked by the following non-verbal categories: <list>Predicate adjectives, e.g., sure, certain, probable, likely, conceivable, doubtful.Adverbs, e.g., Perhaps, maybe, supposedly, surely, allegedly, obviously, presumably.Modal nouns, e.g., chance, likelihood, probability.Certain if-clauses, e.g., 'if you don't mind my saying so', 'what if you're wrong?'Use of non-assertive terms, e.g., 'he'd do anything to help you'.Suprasegmental characteristics of speech, e.g., intonation, hesitation.</list>The above clearly illustrates that the notion of modality is not easily definable in terms of its grammatical or physical manifestation in language, in fact Berk (1999:130) states: "Modality has nothing to do with form". <heading>Modality as a Semantic Notion</heading>The term modality was originally derived from traditional modal logic in which the relationship between necessity (nec) and possibility (poss) of a proposition (p) was formalised in terms of affirmative and negative modal operators as Lyons (1977:787) explains: (1)  FORMULA  (2)  FORMULA  Greek philosophers were concerned with what is now called Alethic modality, i.e., the necessary truth of a proposition as in (1), and realised by the modal expression: (3)  FORMULA  Linguists and logical semanticists have more recently been interested in exploring how language reflects the underlying notions of proposition necessity and possibility, and a number of complex frameworks have been proposed, all of which largely overlap, but none of which appears to account for all the grammatical forms, outlined above, in a comprehensive way. According to De Haan (1997:4), in the 1920s Jespersen first identified two mood categories, one in which the proposition involves 'an element of will' such as an obligation, permission or order, and the other where no element of will is involved, such as a deduction, a conjecture or an expression of doubt. The former of these became to be known as Deontic modality as it relates, in broad terms, to notions of duty, and the latter Epistemic modality owing to its association with the nature of the speaker's knowledge regarding the truth of the proposition. Figure 1 shows how the notion of modality has been differentiated so far in this essay. <figure/>The next two subsections examine the meaning of the terms Epistemic and Deontic, and illustrate how they have been applied to the notion of modality. <heading>Epistemic Modality</heading>In general terms, Epistemic, or extrinsic modality refers to the speaker's judgement on the likelihood of a proposition being true. In addition to the relationship between necessity and possibility discussed above, two further dimensions appear to be involved: certainty-uncertainty and objectivity-subjectivity. The following examples show how modal expressions correspond to points along these continua as a function of the speaker's judgement of the veracity of, and the strength of objective evidence for, the proposition 'John is rich'. Underlined items mean they are stressed. Alternative, equivalent modal expressions (a, b) are provided: <list>- Certainty: Logical necessity based on objective deduction: (4a)  FORMULA  (4b)  FORMULA - Probability: Reasonable inference: (5a)  FORMULA  (5b)  FORMULA - Possibility: Pure supposition: (6a)  FORMULA  (6b)  FORMULA </list>The examples above illustrate the range of certainty from logical necessity to speculative possibility. Individual linguistics have developed their own conceptual models of these underlying relationships and have tended to employ different and sometimes conflicting terminology. Halliday (1970) uses just 'modality' in place of Epistemic modality to refer to an 'interpersonal function' in language. However, I believe the columns 'Probable' and 'Possible' in Table II (page 329) should be reversed to allow the 'likelihood' continuum to be represented in the conventional order. Lyons (1977) criticises linguists for focussing on the subjective characteristics of Epistemic modality and analyses the 'must' in (4a) and the 'may' in (6a) respectively, as examples of objective and subjective Epistemic modality; De Haan (1997) describes this continuum as progressing from the 'strong' to the 'weak' form of modal expression. Palmer (2001) introduces an additional layer into the hierarchy in Figure 1, (Propositional), and divides the source of judgement on the proposition into cognitively-generated (Epistemic), and that derived from sensory or other means (Evidential). <figure/>The importance of Palmer's model of Epistemic modality lies in its ability to accommodate the multifarious manifestations of modality across languages more satisfactorily than has henceforth been possible, an endeavour which only emphasises further the complexity of the semantic attributes of modality. <heading>Deontic Modality</heading>Historically, Epistemic modality was derived from the wider category called root, or Deontic modality. It is described as intrinsic modality and refers to the speaker's intervention through obligation or permission. Berk (1999) effectively employs the terms Directive and Volition to cover the many manifestations of Deontic modality, and Downing and Locke (2001) distinguish between 'inescapable' and 'unfulfilled' obligation in relation to the former, and 'willingness' and 'intention' with respect to the latter. The following examples combine their approaches to classification: <list>- Directives - Inescapable Obligation: (7a)  FORMULA  (7b)  FORMULA  (subjective source) (7c)  FORMULA  (objective source) - Unfulfilled Obligation: (8a)  FORMULA  (8b)  FORMULA  (8c)  FORMULA  - Suggestion: (9)  FORMULA  - Reprimand: (10)  FORMULA  - Permission: (11)  FORMULA  - Request: (12)  FORMULA - Volition - Willingness: (13)  FORMULA  - Refusal: (14)  FORMULA  - Insistence: (15)  FORMULA - Volition - Intention: - Inescapable constraint: (16)  FORMULA  - Threat: (17)  FORMULA  - Promise:  (18)  FORMULA </list>The examples above illustrate the range of commitment to the obligational or volitional element of the proposition whether they reside within the speaker or addressee of the statement. Again, as the sub-categories above suggest, Deontic modality has, like Epistemic modality, been subjected to detailed semantic analysis by linguists. For example, De Haan (1997) claims the 'strong' pole of this continuum represents obligation, and the 'weak', permission. Halliday (1970) uses the term 'modulation' in place of Deontic to refer to an 'ideation function' in language which essentially includes the concepts covered by the examples above, but also the use of modal expressions to convey 'ability' as in: (19)  FORMULA  As with Epistemic modality, Palmer (2001) introduces an additional layer into the hierarchy in Figure 1, (Event), and divides the above Directive and Volitional categories into expressions of Obligation and Permission (Deontic), and Willingness and Ability (Dynamic). <figure/>As mentioned earlier in relation to Epistemic modality, Palmer's model is important because of its attempt to achieve cross-lingual adequacy, but simultaneously illustrates the tendency for semantically ambiguous and confusing terms to proliferate in this field of linguistics. By contrast, De Haan's (1997) endeavours to develop a model of the relationship between modality and negation across languages, results in the narrow selection of specific modals forms and necessary exclusion of many of the instances of modality discussed here. <heading>Evaluation of Modality as a Grammatical or Semantic Notion</heading>The evolutionary development of modality in linguistics from its roots in modal logic has followed a progression that has encouraged the construction of increasingly complex models. In fact, in relation to the types of modality that have been identified, Lyons (1995) concludes: "So far, there is no consensus among either linguists or logicians on the establishment of a comprehensive framework which is both theoretically coherent and empirically satisfactory." Lyons (1995:335). Modality refers to necessity, possibility, certainty, obligation, permission, willingness and ability, but given the wide application of this term, as indicated by the examples above, this list is far from exhaustive. Nevertheless, as Lyons (1977) argues, it is clear that there are strong semantic associations not only among the instances of what is generally called Epistemic modality, and those grouped under the general heading of Deontic modality, but also, between these two categories themselves, both of which can be realised through the use of the same modal expressions. Interestingly, as Palmer (2001) illustrates, this phenomenon occurs in many languages. Therefore, grammatical expressions of modality serve no function in discriminating between categories of modality. This is neatly illustrated by De Haan's (1977) selection of the modal auxiliaries 'must', 'shall', 'will', 'should', 'can', 'could', 'may' and 'might' to describe points along both the Epistemic and Deontic continua. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The concept of modality is about 'how' man operates in the cognitive, physical and social world, where 'how' refers to 'mode of thought' or 'mode of behaviour'. Linguistic expressions of modality reflect how man expresses his interpretations of observations and events occurring around him, and how he tries to influence them. The grammatical system that supports the multifarious aspects of modality in English is itself multifaceted, using not only a specific category of auxiliary, but also a variety of other modal lexical devices. This complex grammatical system of modality singularly fails to distinguish between the various semantic nuances that modality conveys. Modality is primarily a semantically-driven notion that has required the recruitment of many different grammatical forms in order to permit the adequate expression of its complexity. 