<heading>Introduction</heading>The notion of quantification empowers language by providing the facility to generalise from specific individual instances of an attribute to a collection, or quantity, of instances which share that same attribute. In Linguistics, the term 'quantifier' is used to cover all expressions of contrasts in quantity which range from determiners and pronominal items such as all (of), every, each (of), some (of), few, many (of), both (of), neither(of), the first (of), and  ten (of), to adverbial forms such as sometimes, always, seldom, never, hardly and scarcely. In Semantics, specifically in Predicate Calculus, the term 'quantifier' is used to explore the truth value of propositions with respect to the relative scope of Universal Quantifiers () such as  every, each, none, no-one, i.e., 'all', and Existential Quantifiers () such as many, a few, both, two, i.e., 'some', Lyons (1977). This analysis in logic has led to a deeper understanding of the nature of quantifiers in natural language. Quantifiers constitute a universal semantic category in all natural languages, however, there are systematic differences in the manner in which they are manifested grammatically in negative and interrogative clauses across languages. The primary purpose of this essay is to explore the extent to which the behaviour of quantifiers can be satisfactorily captured by syntactic rules, in these two grammatical environments, in contemporary English. This exercise has revealed that there is currently no theory that adequately accounts for the interaction between quantifiers and syntactic rules, semantic interpretations, scope relationships between elements of the clause and the influence of pragmatic factors. Despite the complexity of these interactions, the structure of this essay is designed to address these areas in turn in order to clarify the issues relating to each domain and signal the links between them. <heading>The Nature of Quantifiers</heading>Lyons (1977:455) defines quantifiers as "modifiers which combine with nouns to produce expressions whose reference is thereby determined in terms of the size of the set of individuals or in terms of the amount of substance that is being referred to." As noted in the Introduction, quantifying expressions belong to a variety of grammatical classes and no consistent nomenclature appears to be used for classifying them. Examples of the specific quantifiers selected for the current purposes, on the basis of their relevance to a syntactic analysis of negative and interrogative clauses, are classified by Downing and Locke (2003) as follows: <list>Distributive Deictic Determinative:Adjectives - all, every, each, both, either, neither, etc. Pronouns - all of, each of, both of, neither of, etc. Non-exact Quantifying Determinative: Adjectives - much, many, little, few, etc. Pronouns - much of, many of, little of, a few of, etc. Assertive: Determinatives and Pronouns: some, one, someone/body, something, etc. Adverbs: somewhere, somehow, sometimes, already, still, to some extent, a lot, etc. Non-Assertive: Determinatives and Pronouns: any, either, anyone/body, anything, etc. Adverbs: anywhere, anyhow, ever, yet, any longer, at all, much, etc. </list>The terms Assertive and Non-Assertive are crucial to many of the arguments covered in this essay. Downing and Locke (2003:173) define them as follows: <list>"Assertive forms ..... have factual meanings and typically occur in positive declarative clauses." For example:(1)  FORMULA "Non-Assertive forms ..... are associated with non-factual meanings in the sense of non-fulfilment or potentiality and occur typically in many syntactic contexts ..... of which interrogative clauses and negative clauses are perhaps the most common." (2)  FORMULA (3)  FORMULA </list>Assertive and non-assertive forms are also known as Affirmative and Negative Polar Items (API, NPI). The effect on polar items of interrogative and negative constructions will be discussed in more detail in the next section since these environments are directly pertinent to the theme of this essay, however, NPIs may also be licensed by other syntactic contexts. Quirkal. (1985) provide the most comprehensive list of these non-assertive environments: <list>Wh-questions, e.g.,(4)  FORMULA Putative should-clauses, e.g.,(5)  FORMULA Conditional clauses, e.g.,(6)  FORMULA Comparative Clauses, e.g.,(7)  FORMULA Restrictive relative clauses where a conditional meaning is implied, e.g.,(8)  FORMULA Following morphologically negative words or expressions e.g.,(9)  FORMULA (10)  FORMULA (11)  FORMULA </list>A couple of additional points need to be emphasised here regarding the quantifiers some and any before moving onto the effects of syntactic environment. Firstly, Downing and Lock (2003) identify that although some has a 'specific' meaning in factual assertive contexts, as in: (12)  FORMULA  some can also have a 'non-specific' meaning in non-assertive contexts, as in: (13)  FORMULA  Secondly, any(one) has two distinct meanings. Downing and Lock (2003:175) state that in sentences such as (3) above, anyone is "inherently unstressed", whereas in the following declarative sentence: (14)  FORMULA  anyone is "inherently stressed". The implications of these different terms will be discussed in more detail later. Finally, despite the range of quantifiers outlined here, the main arguments that relate to this essay topic will mainly make reference to the following subset: some, any, every and all. <heading>Negative and Interrogative Contexts</heading>Unlike the process of negating laws of propositional logic, the application of the negative form in natural language can produce effects that generate a variety of meanings depending on the context. Ladusaw (1996:322) states that "The fact that natural language sentences are routinely associated with presuppositions about the contexts in which they may be used means that negation is not generally contradictory with respect to the full domain of contexts but at best contradictory only with respect to the range of contexts in which the presuppositions of the sentence are satisfied." Furthermore, Hoeksema (2000:117) points out that artificial languages employ negation but exhibit no concept of polar-sensitivity, therefore suggesting that "polar-sensitivity is not logically necessary, but a deeply engrained feature of natural language." These quotes set the scene for the arguments that follow in later sections regarding the behaviour of quantifiers in negative syntactic environments. This essay title asks for a statement on the syntactic rules governing quantifiers in negative and interrogative contexts, both of which are non-assertive environments. Analysis of the literature reveals that syntactic rules pertaining to interrogative clauses are considerably more straightforward than those relating to negative contexts, an observation that is borne out by the massive discrepancy in the number of studies carried out in these areas, the latter being disproportionately more extensive and sophisticated. For this reason, and given that the majority of the arguments relating to interrogative clauses have already been outlined in section 2, the remainder of this essay will focus on the behaviour of quantifiers in negative clauses. <heading>Syntactic Rules for Quantifiers</heading>In section 2, an overview was given of the 'standard' grammatical rules associated with assertive and non-assertive quantifies. This section completes the picture with respect to the behaviour of these quantifiers in a negative syntactic environment and identifies a number of cases where grammatical rules appear to be violated. Example (2) illustrated that the process of negating the verb in an assertive clause has the effect of converting it to a non-assertive clause. An alternative would be to retain the affirmative verb form in (1) and use the Nuclear Negative pronoun no-one in place of the NPI anyone: (15)  FORMULA  Nuclear Negatives, in the same way as the negated verb, have the effect of converting all subsequent APIs to NPIs (Quirk et al, 1985): (16)  FORMULA  However, the NPI cannot precede the negative element of the clause: (17)  FORMULA  In more formal English, the negative element may be fronted resulting in subject-operator inversion: (18)  FORMULA  Having outlined the syntactic parameters for the use of NPIs in negative contexts, the following observations appear to defy these basic rules. <heading>Negative Implicature</heading>We saw in (9) and (10) that negative verbs and expressions license NPIs. In the same way, Ladusaw (1996:329) observed that Negative Implicature engendered by weak negative expressions results in the acceptability of NPIs in ostensibly 'assertive' environments: (19)  FORMULA  <heading>Light Predicates</heading>Hoeksema (2000:135) noted that 'light predicates' containing Stage Level expressions also generate acceptable sentences containing NPIs in the absence of an overt negative element. The examples used, contrasted the Stage Level adjective 'available', as in: (20)  FORMULA  with the Individual Level adjective 'intelligent': (21)  FORMULA  <heading>Negative Concord</heading>Negative Concord (NC) is the term given to multiple occurrences of negative expressions in the same clause. NC is the legitimate device used in most Romance languages for expressing the negative, for example, in Italian the sentence "No-one has arrived yet" is translated as: (22)  FORMULA   FORMULA  where both the verb and subject are negative. Although this format does not constitute standard English, there are instances where NC is completely acceptable. Ladusaw (1996) states that: (23)  FORMULA  would be acceptable in certain dialects of English, but fails to point out that the double-negative form has a specific function in standard English as well as communicating subtle, implied meanings, i.e., It's not that John has not seen anyone, it's just that whoever he has seen is not relevant to the context of the utterance. The above exceptions to the standard syntactic rules illustrate that there are other factors at work in these cases. Such factors include the properties of scope relations within the clause and issues associated with the domain of pragmatics. These will be discussed further in the following section. <heading>Scope Relations within Clauses Containing Quantifiers</heading>The role of quantifiers and negation in controlling the locus, direction and extent of scope within clauses containing these operators has been the centre of debate amongst logicians and linguists for many decades. This section presents a number of examples that illustrate the complexity of the inter-connected factors relating to this debate. <heading>The Scope of some</heading>To introduce this area, the following example from Quirk et al (1985:788) illustrates neatly how alternative uses of some and any in the same syntactic structure can modify the scope of these operators as indicated by the horizontal brackets: (24)  FORMULA  (25)  FORMULA  The scope of the negative in (24) does not include the quantifier, therefore the NPI any is not licensed, whereas it is in (25) where negative scope extends to the end of the clause. These examples demonstrate relative scope where two logical elements are in competition for the widest scope. <heading>The Left-to-Right Rule</heading>The traditional view from Predicate Logic is that precedence of scope is based on the relative order of operators from left to right, as stated by Baker (1995:411) in the rule: "In determining the relative scope of quantity words and negatives, assign scope on the basis of the left-to-right position in the sentence, starting with wider scope for whatever is found on the left." Examples (24) and (25) clearly illustrate the limitations of this rule on the basis of sentence surface structure. <heading>Non-Assertive Rule</heading>In addressing the issue of the negative exhibiting wider scope than the quantifier, Baker (1995:411) also defines the Non-Assertive Rule as: "Nonassertive words are used in situations in which they fall within the scope of a negation, i.e., situations in which they have narrower scope than some negative word." Baker widened the domain of application of this rule to include the scope of conditional clauses and comparative expressions, as illustrated in (6) and (7), in the Extended Nonassertive Rule. <heading>Assertive Rule</heading>Despite these rules, it appears that there are still exceptions where the polar item does not have narrower scope as seen in (24). Baker (1995:417) encapsulates the requirements that license the use of some in (24) by the two following rules: "Assertives are interpreted as having wider scope than negatives", and "The Left-to-right rule may be relaxed for assertive words." <heading>Universal Rule</heading>Finally, Baker (1995:418) identified the Universal Rule which states that: "The universal words all and every may fall within the scope of a negative word even when they occur to its left." Thus, Baker's work has articulated some essential ground rules for interpreting the scope relations between negation and quantifiers. A much earlier study by Ioup (1975) explored a number of other factors that affect scope interpretations that again defy the predictions of the Left-to-Right Rule. Although the study focusses on affirmative constructions (rather than negative and interrogative constructions), the findings are of such relevance in understanding the characteristics of quantifiers and scope, that a summary has been included here. <heading>Hierarchy of Quantifiers</heading>Through empirical analysis, Ioup (1975) identified the following scope hierarchy of quantifiers where the items on the left have wider scope than those to the right of them when they co-occur in the same clause: (26)  FORMULA  Thus, the following sentences illustrate how scope is shifted according to this hierarchy: (27)  FORMULA  (28)  FORMULA  <heading>Hierarchy of Grammatical Functions</heading>In addition, Ioup adapted Postal's earlier proposal that grammatical functions also exert differential scope within the clause, and found empirical evidence for the following hierarchy: (29)  FORMULA  <heading>Ambiguity and Universal Quantifiers</heading>Ambiguous sentences can elicit two alternative readings depending on the relative order and scope of quantifiers in logical denotation. For example: (30)  FORMULA  This classic example has the following two alternative readings: <list>- The individual interpretation (pair-wise): each woman built a separate garage, represented as: (31)  FORMULA - The collective interpretation (list): all the woman built a single garage, represented as: (32)  FORMULA </list>By utilising the scope hierarchy set out for grammatical functions in (29), Ioup found consistent trends across languages with respect to the likelihood that interpretations (31) or (32) would be derived from a set of sentences. A scale of five levels of ambiguity judgements were identified: <list>Level 1 - unambiguous: Collective interpretation onlyLevel 2 - ambiguous: Collective interpretation preferredLevel 3 - ambiguous: no preferred readingLevel 4 - ambiguous: Individual interpretation preferredLevel 5 - unambiguous: Individual interpretation only</list>The example sentences that Ioup presents do not include negative or interrogative clauses, therefore the exploration of this approach in this essay is limited to this overview, but suffice to say that these results illustrate that a number of factors are at work in determining the locus and extent of scope in sentences containing quantifiers. Furthermore, this area of Collective and Individual Ambiguity has encouraged additional fruitful work on the study of quantifiers. It is interesting to compare (33) cited by Chierchia (1990), and (34) which I have devised for the purposes of illustrating another property of quantifiers and ambiguity: (33)  FORMULA  (34)  FORMULA  The immediate reading of (33) is the pair-wise interpretation, or w, f, whereas the preferred reading of (34) is the list interpretation, or m, w. But, the syntactic structures of the two sentences are identical and the choice of quantifiers is also the same. Chierchia (1990:119) concludes "It appears ..... that any quantifier scope construal is possible as far as semantics goes, and that pragmatic factors or lexical properties of items may rule certain construals out." It therefore appears that pragmatic factors influence the likelihood of one interpretation over another, and perhaps in the above examples the lexical semantics of the verb types "hang" and "look into" also affect the direction of ambiguity resolution, although I have not found a discussion of this topic in the literature covered for this essay. Sentences (35) and (36) illustrate how the application of the wh-phrase "which" can reveal preferred readings by identifying the implicit plural elements of (33) and (34): (35)  FORMULA  (36)  FORMULA  The examples so far have examined ambiguity in affirmative clauses containing quantifiers. Negation introduces additional problems of scope. <heading>Ambiguity Triggered by Negation</heading>Quirk et al (1985:789) identify a distinction in the scope of the negative as a result of two alternative interpretations of the following sentence: (37)  FORMULA  where according to the interpretation ~(leave home) (because I was afraid of my father): (38)  FORMULA  fear of my father was the exact reason why I didn't leave home. Alternatively, according to the reading (leave home) ~(because I was afraid of my father): (39)  FORMULA  I left home for some other reason than my fear of my father. However, Ladusaw (1996:334) illustrates that the polar expression "budge an inch", can restrict the scope of the negative in contrast to the non-polar expression "move" in the following: (40)  FORMULA  where the negative has the same two possible scope ranges as shown in (38) and (39), i.e., ~(move) (because he was scared), and (move) ~(because he was scared). But the sentence: (41)  FORMULA  only allows the interpretation furnished by (38), ~(budge an inch) (because he was scared), and not (budge an inch) ~(because he was scared) as in (39). Here the scope of the negative expression is restricted to the polar item only. Therefore, here there is evidence of an interaction between lexical forms expressing collocation (move -vs- budge an inch), and their ability to generate a different number of readings in potentially ambiguous sentences. The Two Forms of any In section 2, two readings of any were identified: the stressed and unstressed forms. Lyons (1977:456) states that "No agreement has yet been reached ..... on the semantic interpretation of expressions containing 'any'." and this comment appears to relate to both forms. Examples (2) and (13) illustrate the problem with respect to the unstressed form, or existential quantifier . The stressed form, example (14), is often represented by a separate lexical expression in other languages, (e.g., in Italian, qualcuno / nessuno are unstressed whereas chiunque / qualsiasi are stressed), and it would seem that if these linguistic alternatives continue to survive in other languages, there is good justification for them given their differences in meaning. Lyons reports that logicians and philosophers have viewed stressed any as being equivalent to the universal quantifier owing to the similarly wide scope relationships associated with each, every and all. I find this approach reasonable because in Italian, the terms for all or every are sometimes used to emphasise or in place of the stressed form of any. Davidson (1980) explores this issue in depth and instead proposes that any is always a reflex of the existential quantifier, and that the wide scope universal interpretation of any is derived through Conversational Implicature in the context of certain linguistic environments such as modal expressions, and the imperative. If this proves to be the case, then this argument provides another example of pragmatic factors affecting the interpretation of quantifiers. <heading>Conclusion</heading>There is no doubt that the study of quantifiers, particularly in the context of negative clauses has presented logicians and linguists alike with a number of perplexing and contradictory phenomena. In sections 2 and 3, this essay articulated the syntactic rules relating to quantifiers in negative and interrogative clauses in about 500 words, and then proceeded in subsequent sections to discuss the exceptions in a further 2,000 words. A number of illustrations have been presented where grammatically acceptable clauses contain configurations that appear to defy syntactic rules, and where the locus and range of scope items appear to interact with other elements in the clause. In particular, there is plenty of evidence that Conversational Implicature and Negative Implicature influence the interpretation of quantifying expressions in certain contexts. Moreover, it appears that the full impact of the role of lexical semantics in the context of scope ambiguity is far from fully explained. Quantifiers are of particular interest to logicians and linguists for two reasons. Firstly, their inclusion in propositional statements has provided formal logic with the tools to progress from Propositional to Predicate Calculus. Secondly, the process of Quantifier Raising allows the syntactician to derive the Logical Form of the proposition from surface structure. However, despite their critical role in these domains of analysis, the quantifier, in particular in its interaction with negation, appears to raise more questions than it answers. It is concluded, therefore, that syntactic rules alone are insufficient to predict the behaviour of quantifiers in negative and interrogative sentences. It is certain that this area will present the logician and linguist with a wealth of challenges for many years to come before a fully integrated, explanatory theory of quantifiers has been identified. 