<heading>Preamble</heading>This paper describes and intends to propose solutions for the management of a fraction of a Natural Protected Area and its buffer zone, located in Paracas Bay in the coast of Peru. Conflicts of use arise between the Protected Area's conservation objectives, local small fishermen's livelihoods, local fishmeal factories' fishing and industrial activities, tourism, close growing urban areas, an adjacent agricultural valley and a recently established natural gas fractioning plant. In the first part, a general description of the area, the main actors and their activities in the site, the resulting environmental impacts and conflicts and the existing policies will be summarised. The second part will present a proposal for ordering the framework of institutions, stakeholders and uses of the area in order to harmonize its current uses while preserving the existing biodiversity. <heading>General description</heading>The Paracas National Reserve (PNR) was created in 1975 with the aim to preserve and promote the sustainable use of a representative sample of the ecology and the biologic diversity of the Peruvian Current Ecosystem and the Tropical Coastal Desert (Brack, 1986; The Natural Conservancy, 2005). As the only Protected Area preserving the Peruvian coastal-marine ecosystem, enriched by the presence of the cold Peruvian Current and the South American upwelling system, Paracas is valuable as one of the most biologically productive marine areas in the world and as habitat for unique fish, marine mammal and bird species (INRENA, 2002; The Natural Conservancy, 2005). PNR was declared in 1991 a Shorebird Reserve in the Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network, and in 1992 it was added to the list of Internationally Important Wetlands protected by the Ramsar Convention (ParksWatch, 2005). Paracas also has archaeological importance, hosting Pre-Incan relics (The Natural Conservancy, 2005). It is thus one of the most visited tourist sites in Peru, generating economic flows of up to 9 million dollars and receiving around 120 thousand tourists annually (Foro Ciudades para la Vida, 2006). PNR has an extension of 335000 ha (65% marine and 35% terrestrial) and is located in the provinces of Pisco and Ica (Region of Ica, Peru - see Figure 1), between sea level and 786 meters of altitude. Average temperatures range from 15.5 in winter to 22°C in the summer. Average annual precipitation is practically non-existent (<2 mm) (ParksWatch, 2005). The ecological importance of PNR lies within its high diversity and because it constitutes a breeding refuge for important pelagic species (such as the anchovy) and for a variety of shorebird communities. Although the terrestrial flora is scarce because of the sandy desert environment, 54 plant species have been identified. Marine species are abundant, with 295 species of algae, 190 mollusks, 168 fish and 101 invertebrate species (The Nature Conservancy, 2005). Additionally, 216 species of native and migratory shorebirds have been found, as well as 19 mammals and 6 reptiles (ParksWatch, 2005). Among these, there are some threatened species such as the sea otter and the Peruvian diving petrel (in danger of extinction according to IUCN) (ERM Perú, 2002). Paracas Bay, which is the area of study of the present paper, is an especially conflictive area inside PNR. It consists of a closed bay, with a moderate dynamic activity in the coastal area and slow currents in its centre, resulting in a slow interchange of water with the outside sea (see Figure 2). This is why its hydrochemical properties have a slow rate of recovery, which enhances the potential impacts of water pollution generated by industrial and domestic wastewaters coming from further north (Solís et al, 2000). <figure/><figure/><heading>Main actors, economic activities and threats</heading>In the next matrix (Table 1), the main actors, economic activities and the real impacts or potential threats imposed by them on the Paracas Bay will be listed. The governmental institutions have not been considered for this analysis because they will be studied in detail in the next section. <table/><heading>Institutional chaos</heading>Paracas, like all of Peru's natural protected areas, is managed by the Natural Protected Areas General Intendancy of the National Institute of Natural Resources (INRENA), which depends from the Ministry of Agriculture. Nonetheless, the Vice-ministry of Fisheries is responsible for controlling the fisheries and the fishing effort in the reserve, while INRENA manages the flora and fauna in the terrestrial area. Additionally, the archaeological ruins are controlled and maintained by the National Institute of Culture (from the Education Sector). This makes it very difficult to regulate the fishing activities and causes conflict between the different competent sectors involved (ParksWatch, 2005). More than 30 institutions, including government entities (from at least 6 different sectors, as well as the local government at the district, province and regional level), private institutions and NGOs, share roles in the running of the reserve and its buffer zone, making it ineffective and inefficient. The legal framework is not clear and does not help to establish an understandable hierarchy of authorities. (ParksWatch, 2005; INRENA, 2005; ERM Peru, 2002). <heading>Existing strategies and policies</heading>Although there are many efforts in place aimed at protecting either the PNR or just Paracas Bay, there does not seem to be a reduction of the presented problems. The main ones are: Natural Reserve's Master Plan 2003-2007: Designed by the Reserve's administration with participation of local institutions and stakeholders, the PNR Master Plan is the main management guideline for the reserve for the next few years. It comprises strategies for resources conservation, public use control, management support, and a detailed definition of different management zones (INRENA, 2002). Its main limitations are the insufficient personnel, logistics and budget assigned by INRENA for the reserve. Although every visitor has to pay an entrance fee, this income is managed centrally by INRENA and distributed to all the national protected areas system as part of the state's budget for them, so that Paracas itself does not receive a significant part of the resources it generates (ParksWatch, 2005). Buffer Zone creation: The PNR's buffer zone was establish recently in 2001 (INRENA and SPDA, 2002), covering an area where many impacting activities are already in place (see Figure 1). Thus, its objectives cannot be properly achieved. PAMAs for fishing industries: As part of the increase of environmental regulations in the country, the Fisheries Vice-Ministry requires that all existing industries not having an EIA (because it was not required previously), should design and follow an Environmental Adaptation and Management Programme (PAMA). Nonetheless, firms are not complying with their PAMAS and are continuously requesting reschedules. Although they have installed wastewater processing facilities, the 7 fishmeal plants located north of the Reserve, process 1 million tonnes of fish, and still discharge around 30000 tonnes of proteins and 8000 tonnes of fish oil in their effluents annually (Mundo Azul, 2005). Creation of APROPISCO: As one of the measures included in their PAMAs, these 7 industries formed a consortium (APROPISCO) in order to install a pipeline system to dump the wastewater 12km out to sea and thus reduce water pollution in the bay. The system does not work properly, because of the current system that returns all the waste back to the bay and due to spillages along the pipeline. Water quality in the bay is critical, and massive fish death events are still observed in relation to fishmeal production activity. NGOs' projects: Local NGOs are engaged in various projects aiming at wildlife conservation research, local waste management programmes local training workshops and beach cleaning campaigns. Although they raise some public awareness and improve specific problems, these efforts are isolated. They should rather be coordinated as part of a broader conservation strategy (The Nature Conservancy, 2005; Mundo Azul, 2005; ProNaturaleza, 2005). Creation of an Autonomous Commission for the Sustainable Development of Paracas Bay: As a strategy for improving their environmental performance, the Camisea Natural Gas project is supporting this Commission, which will "rehabilitate the risk zones existing in the bay and launch some technological advances to help to preserve the reserve" (WWF, 2003). Pro Paracas project: Launched by the Regional Government, this initiative is also aiming at preserving Paracas Bay. Its first activities will be to assess the pollution levels in the area, help establish maximum allowable pollution levels and identify the problems' responsibles, before engaging in a process of strategic planning (CNR, 2005). Once again, this instance will repeat what other institutions have already or are doing: water quality assessments are done regularly by the Fisheries Vice-Ministry and by APROPISCO itself; who is responsible for water pollution is already known; maximum allowable pollution levels were already created and then revoked because of the fishing industry's pressure; strategic planning has already been done by the PNR Master Plan. <heading>The proposal </heading>The panorama in Paracas Bay is highly complex. Conservation, human livelihood, commercial and industrial objectives converge causing conflicts of use that seem irreconcilable. Too many governmental institutions have a word in Paracas' management and coordination between them is lacking. However, Paracas is a place worth preserving and efforts need to be done, but in an integrated, coordinated, structured way. The next sections will be devoted to present and describe the objectives and strategies to solve the exposed problematic and a specific proposal for the development of an institutional framework re-arrangement and the establishment of an integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) programme. <heading>Objectives Tree</heading><figure/>In order to achieve the adequate and sustainable conservation of the Paracas Bay ecosystem, water quality, biodiversity preservation and habitat conservation are of vital importance. Additionally, to preserve and enhance the tourism importance of the site, the scenic beauty and local archaeological sites need to be sustained. As can be seen in Figure 3, adequate fishing, industrial and agricultural practices, as well as a proper control and management of the National Reserve and the Buffer Zone (thus including the urban and residential areas) are needed to achieve the conservation objectives described above. The fundamental step towards these goals is the establishment of clear competences for all the governmental authorities locally engaged, and if possible their simplification. Additionally, the local government needs to improve the available sanitation facilities (for solid and liquid wastes) and develop appropriate urban planning measures in order to control the direction and the possible pressures of future urban growth. <heading>The strategy: Institutional framework re-arrangement and integrated coastal zone management programme</heading>The most relevant governmental institutions engaged in the area are: The Ministry of Agriculture: through INRENA and the PNR Authority, is responsible for the management of the PNR; directly, it the agricultural area of the valley The Vice-Ministry of Fisheries: for fishing effort and amount control, water pollution monitoring and marine resource management The Ministry of Defence: through the General Port Capitany (DICAPI) of the National Marine, it is responsible for controlling marine traffic, and also for preventing marine pollution. The local government: is responsible for urban planning and municipal solid waste management. It needs to be taken into account that there are two levels of local government: at the district and the province level, and additionally there is the regional government. Of these institutions, only one should be in charge of coordinating the coastal zone management plan for Paracas. Because of its technical capacity and because its authority covers the whole area (both the Paracas National Reserve and the Buffer Zone), having neither the restricted administrative boundaries of the local governments nor the specific sectoral competences of the Ministries, the PNR Authority should be the one carrying this responsibility. Additional budged will be needed in order to comply with its existing objectives (as stated in the PNR Management Plan for 2003-2007) and with these new ones. This could be achieved if INRENA decentralised the allocation of resources, allowing each Natural Protected Area (NPA) to manage its own income, and also by seeking financial support from NGOs and international cooperation agencies. Thus, with enough financial means to provide for the logistic and human resource needs, the PNR Authority could exert a real control over the activities affecting the area. Local NGOs are valuable as partner institutions of the above mentioned governmental authorities, and as such should try to work always in close coordination with them. They could be of great help for the aim of arising awareness of the benefits of conservation among the local population and especially among the fishermen, whose livelihoods depend on these resources. Educational campaigns should aim at reducing the slaughtering of wildlife by the fishermen and to improve their fishing practices. For the conservation of specific species being illegally caught, it is the demand that needs to be tackled. So, local shops for tourists should be controlled in order to prevent selling of turtle or dolphin parts, and the DICAPI should try to exert more control over informal exportation of wildlife and wildlife products. There are some opportunities arising from the recent controversial establishment of a natural gas fractioning plant in the area. As it is already in place and working, and moving it will not be viable in the short term, the natural gas plant could help to the conservation objectives by exerting pressure on the other local industries: for example by offering them cheaper energy only if they comply with certain environmental standards. This can only be achieved through close cooperation with the PNR authorities and local government, so they should try to regard the gas plant as an associate rather than as a menace. The Integrated Coastal Zone Management Programme to be developed by the PNR Authority with the participation of all the local actors would serve as coordination instance between the involved authorities. It should aim to merge all existing projects, programmes, strategies and initiatives in one comprehensive programme, in order to reduce the duplication of expenditures and of efforts. It is of major importance that the fishing industry will be forced to comply with their PAMAs in the short term. The Vice-Ministry of Fisheries has to assume its controlling role and take serious measures to achieve this goal, and also to control the size and weight of species caught,, as well as compliance with seasonal fishing bans for the various species. Finally, the excess of fishing and the inadequate use of marine resources could be regulated through detailed zoning within the Bay, limiting access to special conservation areas. This should be applicable also for scallop production concessions. 