<heading>Introduction</heading>Agricultural policy in Poland has been diverse over the past 20 years, it has varied from negative protection in 1990/91 i.e. food consumers were subsidized by agricultural producers to relatively high levels of support in the late 1990s (World Bank, 2000). In the last few years, with the approaching of the EU accession which eventually took place in 2004, market price support has been decreased and a general shift to other support measures took place. In the following the extent and impact of the different policy measures used by the Polish government in the pursuit of its objectives are analysed and discussed. The achievements of the policies are examined as well as their side-effects and based on these findings, policy recommendations are made. <heading>Agriculture in Poland</heading>Agricultural area in Poland amounts to 18.2 million hectares representing 58.3% of the total area (European Commission, 2002). Four fifths of agricultural land was not put into collective farms and basically all land is farmed privately. The average farm size in 1998 was 7.9 ha (Sharman, 2003). However, the farm structure differs significantly on a regional basis: A small number of formerly state-owned but now increasingly privately owned large commercial farms is situated in the northern and western part of the country (IAMO,2004). Whereas in the rest of the country a large number of very small farms, usually run with labour from one family and producing for subsistence prevail. The fragmented pattern of ownership is a constraint to investment in efficiency improvements (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005) and farms are largely over-equipped with machinery and buildings that are largely depreciated and out-of-date (Petrick, 2004). Hence, capital endowment of farms is low and it is substituted by land and labour. This demonstrates that a low degree of specialisation is the main reasons for low agricultural productivity and low farm income levels in Poland (IAMO, 2004). <fnote>Note: This figure overstates the average size of agricultural holdings as holdings less than 1 hectare are not included (Sharman, 2003) </fnote>Accordingly, the economic importance of the agricultural sector in terms of GDP is small with a GDP of 2.9% in 2002 (EU-27 average 2%). However, the agricultural sector plays an important role in employment. In 2000, 18.8% of the population were employed in this sector (Latruffe et al., 2005). Small family farms have served in the past as a buffer for the unemployed and compensated for the uncertain and inadequate safety net provided by state pensions which lead to overpopulation and hidden unemployment in the countryside (Sharman, 2003). <heading>Government intervention in agriculture</heading>Farmers in Poland have been very effective in pushing their interests, both at the ballot box and in the street (Sharman, 2003). Generally, aid has been much more forthcoming for private farmers, as opposed to state farms and upstream and downstream firms, as every farmer owning more than 0.3 hectares qualifies for state support (Sharman, 2003). However, generally agricultural support in Poland is relatively low, in 2003 the % PSE came to 9% while the OECD average was 31% for the period of 2001 to 2003. The total costs for agriculture made up 1% of GDP in 2001-03, which is approximately half the level of 1991-93. The cost imposed on consumers (CSE) averaged 9% in 2001-03 (OECD, 2004). <fnote>Producer Support Estimate (PSE): an indicator of the annual monetary value of gross transfers from consumers and taxpayers to agricultural producers, measured at the farm-gate level, arising from policy measures that support agriculture, regardless of their nature, objectives or impacts on farm production or income (OECD). </fnote><fnote>Consumer Support Estimate (CSE): the annual monetary value of gross transfers to/from consumers of agricultural commodities, measured at the farm-gate level, arising from policy measures that support agriculture, regardless of their nature, objectives or impacts on consumption of farm products (Legg, 2003). </fnote>The government intervenes in several ways to overcome uncertainty in production and instability in prices farm incomes and eventually to support farm incomes (Legg, 2003). Further, the government attempts to promote structural change in that farmers increase their productivity by using current production factors more intensively, i.e. increasing yields, by using more land and/or capital, by specialising their enterprises and thus becoming more efficient and by reducing the agricultural labour force (Lindemans and Swinnen, 1997). Another reason for government intervention is that Polish agricultural production has to comply with EU regulations ranging from labelling and product information to quarantine, veterinary and phytosanitary regulations (Sharman, 2003). <heading>Price Support and Support to inputs</heading><heading>a) Market and Price Support</heading>Market price support as one of the major policy instruments accounted for approximately 2/3 of the total PSE in 1991-93 and in 2001-03 (OECD, 2004). It was seen as a means of supporting farm incomes, which fell by over 60 % over the period 1990-2000 by guaranteeing a minimum price on major commodities (European Commission, 2002). <list><heading>Measures applied in 2001 included:</heading>Tariffs and tariff rate quotasMinimum prices and intervention purchases: wheat, rye, butter, milk, honey, and pig meat (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005)Ad-hoc intervention purchases and selling for othersPrice support, production quotas and export subsidies: SugarThreshold system for import quantity or price triggering additional import levies: most crops and livestockAd-hoc (temporary import levies): wheat, maize, sugar, pork (IAMO, 2004).</list><heading>b) Input-linked Support </heading>Intervention in input markets includes: subsidies for productivity enhancing inputs such as plant protection, biological improvement and soil liming; subsidies to agricultural fuel and organic farming (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005) The input subsidies along with the credit subsidies (see below) provide to some extent a compensation to farmers for the high prices of tradable inputs (agrochemicals, machinery, equipment, etc.) which arise from border protection (World Bank, 2000). <heading>Effects on farmers</heading>Graph 1 depicts the effects of market price support. <figure/>Price support leads to an increase in producer surplus by the area A+B+C while the amount of support to farmers corresponds to the area B+C+D. Price support distorts farmers' production decisions and therefore leads to resource misallocation. It inhibits structural change because if it was not for price support, farmers on the supply function between Q W and Q S2, supposedly small inefficient farmers, would exit the industry and release land for larger farms achieving economies of scale. Further, in case of price support benefits are linked to output so that larger producer who produce more gain more and support is no targeted towards where it is most needed (XXXX). The process of intervention has also had ambiguous effects on Polish farmers because it has been visibly unstable in the past and therefore it forced farmers to diversify production to. However, specialization is perceived as a way to increase farm incomes (IAMO, 2004). Further, intervention buying has led since 2002 to large cereal stocks which increased pressure on domestic markets and therefore on farm incomes (European Commission, 2002). However, when looking at the minimum prices scheme, World Bank (2000) concluded that it did have an upward effect on farmgate prices and therefore on income. Notably, the fiscal cost of the scheme, in the case of sugar and pork, were not equivalent to the income transfer to farmers considering the high margins in the agro-processing industry (World Bank, 2000). Legg (2003) found in his model the transfer efficiency of market price support measures to be very low with around 25 cents of each extra $ of support is actually being retained by farmers. The remainder accrues in the form of efficiency losses (area D in Graph 1), and higher costs in general, in terms of higher expenditure on inputs and higher values of land and quotas (Legg, 2003). Both price support and input support partly lead to an increase in the price of agricultural inputs. Evidence suggests that cross-border pricing differentials in pesticides arise from manufacturers discriminating prices but also from differences in demand for factors, which in turn reflects the height of support to agriculture (Dewbre and Short, 2002). As shown in Graph 2, domestic support tends to be capitalised into the value of land, which in turn encourages its more intensive use (Legg, 2003). <figure/>Already a small increase in the value of land shifts the demand curve from D L up to D L' causing land prices to rise substantially as it is relatively inelastic in supply. As a consequence, benefits from agricultural support accrue to the owners of land. Farmers renting or wanting to expand their farms may actually be penalized by the subsidies. Investment is diverted away from productive assets and the problem of intergenerational transfer is exacerbated as established and retiring farmers benefit disproportionately at the expense of the next generation. Hence, when the increased farm incomes become capitalized into higher land values, they become part of the cost structure and the overall rate of return remains low (Dewbre and Short, 2002). <heading>Effects on Consumers and taxpayers</heading>Market price support causes a loss in consumer surplus by A+B as depicted in Graph 1. on the other hand, the burden of input and price support falls on both taxpayers and on consumers. However, while taxation is progressive, the effect of the higher food prices P S on income is regressive. This is critical given the relative large proportion of low income households in Poland, with about 13% of the population living below the poverty line. According to World Bank (2000) price support reduced real income of consumers during 1993-1996 by 4.3 percent. At the same time the average share of expenditure on food products in 1997 was 36% which is regarded as fairly representative for the whole post-reform period (World Bank, 2000). <heading>Effects on the environment</heading>Price support and input support are likely to be detrimental to the environment in that they make farming more profitable. This in turn promotes intensification and economically marginal and environmentally fragile land and other resources are brought into production. However, in some cases price and input support may allow traditional agricultural production, which would otherwise not be profitable, to continue, providing landscapes and habitats that are environmentally beneficial (Legg, 2003). <heading>Farm credit program</heading>Generally, asymmetric information between lenders and borrowers and the uncertain conditions in agriculture and financial markets lead to imperfections in credit markets, most notably credit constraints (Sunding and Zilberman, 2001). To that effect, Polish agriculture is short in capital in terms of finance and agricultural machines (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005). The farm credit programme launched in 1994 is one of the major instruments the Polish government uses to promote structural change and to overcome the problem of low capital endowment in the farming sector. The agency for the Restructuring and Modernisation of Agriculture, grants investment credit interest subsidies encompassing interest subsidies on loans for the purchase of inputs, basic investment, land purchases, investments by young farmers, sector programs and others (Petrick, 2004). However, the programme failed to eliminate credit rationing which is particularly encountered by small farmers, and it failed to allocate credits efficiently (Petrick, 2004, and IAMO, 2004). Credit rationing persists because of still unresolved problems with information asymmetries encountered by lenders. Furthermore, efficient credit allocation was hampered as funds were not always used by farmers for productive investment (Petrick, 2004). Consequently, the subsidised credits should be scrutinised to ensure that they are used to foster structural change rather than financing consumption activities (Petrick, 2004). The unfinished restructuring process of the rural banking sector is thought to be partly responsible for the persisting inefficient banking practices. An improvement of the rural banking industry by e.g. injecting human capital and technology is required to overcome inefficiencies in the credit program (IAMO, 2004). Cost accruing from obtaining information about the benefits and the risks associated with a subsidised investment and from covering bank losses from non-repaid agricultural credits, are born to a large extent by society and not by the individual farmers (IAMO, 2004 and World Bank, 2000). Given that in 1998 the subsidy payments on all types of loans came to approx. 182 million euros and made up 38% of the budget of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (Petrick, 2004), a banking sector who is able to allocate credits efficiently is important to save taxpayers money. Because of lower information costs associated with larger farms they preferably received credits as opposed to small farms (IAMO, 2004). Even though small farms make up the largest proportion of the farming population they are not the major beneficiaries of these schemes and the income gap between small and large farms is widened. With the EU accession it is expected that the direct payments effectively bridge the working capital shortage of farms in Poland which in turn might lead to an expansion of production on currently credit rationed farms (Petrick 1, 2004). <heading>Subsidies to farmers' pension and health insurance scheme</heading>The pension and early retirement scheme as well as a health insurance scheme are at 97 % subsidized by the state budget, while 7 % is contributed by farmers. The main objective of the early retirement system is to facilitate exit of the industry on the part of older farmers making land available for the next generation or for farm expansions. The pension scheme aims at ensuring income for elderly farmers (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005). Opposed to its intention, this type of production de-coupled support creates an incentive to stay in farming and it even attracts new entrants as it only requires one hectare of land to qualify as a farmer and receive the financial benefits. Hence, in order to promote structural change and in order to reduce overall costs more stringent requirements for qualifying as a farmer are necessary. The scheme raises some questions regarding equity as it involves implicit money transfer from non-farm employees to farmers because pension and health insurance benefits are the same for both groups (World Bank, 2000). <heading>Fiscal policy measures </heading>Poland has implemented a differentiated system of value added tax (VAT) rates, in which the general VAT rate is 22%, while for agricultural and food products a 3% VAT rate applies and no VAT is imposed on machinery and tractors (IAMO, 2004) as well as on agricultural services and farm animal breeding (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005). Farmers are also exempt from paying income tax instead they pay a land tax which is set at the federal level for every territory and which is differentiated according to land quality. The tax is paid on the basis of land owned which is considerably lower than the income tax (World Bank, 2000). As a production decoupled policy the differential income tax treatment does not, in principle, affect production decisions but support farmers' income. However, similar to the pension subsidy, the concessions on income tax provide an incentive to stay in farming which in turn might slow down the necessary structural change. The polish government expects a reduction of the nominal and real interest rates as a result of further macroeconomic stabilisation and the inclusion of Polish agriculture to the CAP (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005). <heading>Agricultural advisory services</heading>Agricultural advisory services have been set up in Poland. They are co-financed by the state and linked to research institutes (IAMO, 2004). According to the OECD (2004), support for general services provided to agriculture which included agricultural advisory services in 2001-03 was modest at 12% of total support, a slight decrease from 1991-93. An assessment of the advisory services showed that they are generally successful in improving farm efficiency, product quality and competitiveness. The preponderance of small farms which often lack managerial skills and which are relatively poor makes the advisory services highly valuable. However, some experts criticise that the advisory services are too focused towards technical issues and too little oriented towards economic and policy advice (IAMO 1, 2004). <heading>Trade protection</heading>Poland imports significant amounts of basic agricultural products: grains, oilseeds, poultry meat, etc. Consequently, with the exception of sugar, no export subsidies are applied for agricultural commodities (Lindemans and Swinnen, 1997). According to World Bank (2000) Poland used to follow an import-substitution policy by supporting importables and taxing exportables with the intention of diminishing the food trade deficit. In the long run, this kind of policy is likely to have negative effects on the competitiveness of Polish agriculture as farmers move resources from relatively competitive commodities which are exported, to less competitive products which are imported. This anti-trade policy stance is likely to have adverse effects on social welfare (World Bank, 2000). However, with the accession of the EU, Poland is likely to move towards more free trade in its agricultural sector. The EU accession has lead to more subsidized EU products on the Polish market to the benefit of domestic consumers as tariff barriers have been lowered. Trade with the EU has not been liberalised to the extent as expected because of the exemption of many 'sensitive sectors' in agriculture and elsewhere from the liberalisation process (Sharman, 2003). Hence, polish farmers are facing the erosion of their position in domestic markets by subsidized foreign competition, while they are in many cases locked out of their major potential export market (Sharman, 2003). <heading>Direct Payments</heading>Polish farmers will initially qualify for only about 25 percent of the support available to farmers in the EU-15, and they will have to wait 10 years to be eligible for the full payments (Sharman, 2003). The Polish Ministry of Agriculture expects farm incomes to increase with the introduction of direct payments under the CAP. However, the decoupled payments aggravate the problem of capitalization. New farmers and farmers wanting to expand do not benefit from the programs themselves because the future payments are monetized in the form of higher land prices (Dewbre and Short, 2002) Decoupled subsidies constitute a transfer from taxpayers to the farmers. Since no market intervention occurs, consumer welfare is not affected by the policy. However, some farmers may cheat and therefore policy enforcement requires additional funds financed by taxpayers (Giannakas and Fulton, 2002). In the course of EU accession Poland has also to apply agri-environmental measures (OECD, 1999). The direct payments to farmers under these schemes are meant to offset damaging environmental effects of agriculture and eventually of input and output-linked policies. Hence, the costs of improving environmental performance are higher and the payments have to be higher than they would be in the absence of such support policies (Legg, 2003). <heading>Conclusion</heading>The Polish government uses a variety of instruments to promote structural change of the farming sector. It has been relatively successful with the installation of the advisory services, and other measures such as the farm credit programme are potentially successful if inefficiencies can be overcome. However, some measures including market price support and domestic support do not raise farm incomes in the long-run and the raise issues regarding intergenerational and social equity. It may be that at least part of the solution for the Polish government to ensure "reasonable" income levels for farm households lies outside of agricultural policy entirely. Temporary income support, training and skills upgrading, reemployment assistance, etc. could prove to be more efficient and cost effective than the current policy set (Dewbre and Short, 2002). 