<heading>2.1 Introduction</heading>The purpose of this chapter is to provide a review of the literature on the Polish agriculture and in particular the fruit production. Moreover, the effects of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the Polish agri-food chain on Polish farms are investigated <heading>2.2 Agriculture in Poland: An overview</heading>Polish agriculture is characterised by unfavourable structures and low incomes (Gorton et al, 2001). Labour is the most intensively used input and the labour-intensity of small-scale farming may not decrease until alternative employment opportunities arise (Munroe, 2001). Hence, with almost 20% of the population being employed in agriculture, mostly on small farms (Dries and Swinnen, 2004), agriculture is a very important sector in the Polish economy (Munroe, 2001). As regards FDI in Polish agriculture, in 2004 the inflow in the agricultural sector amounted to approx. USD 14.5 mio. accounting for 0.2% of the total investment flow. The aggregated value of FDI in agriculture amounted to approx. USD 76.3 mio. accounting for 0.1% of the total value. The top twenty major foreign investors include three wholesale and retail traders, namely Metro Group AG (no. 5), Tesco Plc (no. 8) and Carrefour (no. 17) (PAIiIZ, 2004). <heading>2.3 The fruit sector</heading>A leading European producer of fruit, Poland has the capability to grow all types of temperate fruit which require intensive management and the climate and soils to produce good quality and meet bulk orders of a range of products (Faesel and Hill, 1995). It is estimated that the amount of fruit produced in 2003 totalled 3 million tons (including 70% apples) (Regnier, et al., 2004). Out of the 270,000 ha in fruit production 25% are private gardens, 44% constitute semi-intensive and 22% constitute intensive farming. There are 800,000 producers out of which 95% cultivate less than 1 ha, 60,000 cultivate 3-10 ha and 1,000 cultivate over 10 ha (Duponcel, 2004). Polish fruit growers lack capital which constrains their ability to invest in quality and restructuring. Moreover, their input use is low causing yields to fluctuate and productivity to be low (Maack, 2005). Accordingly, the yield of apples per hectare in 2004 was 14.4 tonnes in Poland while it was 34.4 tonnes in Italy (FAOSTAT, 2006). While merely about 2,000 enterprises own modern plants, the number of medium sized enterprises with own cold-storage is increasing (Maack, 2005). The number of members in the 140 horticulture cooperatives has dropped from 372,600 in 1988 with a market share of about 50%, to 90,000 with a market share of 8% in 2000. New forms of cooperatives were established which usually are engaged in very basic activities such as collecting and marketing (Faesel and Hill, 1995). <table/><heading>2.4 Relations to upstream agents</heading>Small growers deliver during the harvest once a day to collecting points which are organised either by traders or freezing companies. The fruit are then exported or sold to the Polish processing industry. There are a number of large, specialist growers who have contracts with the major exporting companies or sell directly into export markets (Faesel and Hill, 1995). These and members of producer groups tend to sell directly to large purchasers like super- and hypermarket chains or processing and exporting companies which required them to adapt to long payment periods and high quality requirements. However, the majority of fruit producers prefers to sell to intermediaries since transport costs are lower and since they receive payment in cash whereas with fruit processing companies they would have to wait 14 days (Maack, 2005). Still, the production of fruit is still highly fragmented, few co-operatives exist at the producer level, and growers tend to be in a weak position owing to their small scale of operation which is further exacerbated by the lack of a comprehensive wholesale marketing system (Faesel and Hill,1995). As a consequence, both growers and export traders are vertically integrating to take over the wholesaling functions (Maack, 2005). The Polish fruit and vegetable processing industry is dominated by foreign capital and the share of foreign traders in the food market has risen sharply (Csaki et al., 2004). This may have negative effects on small farmers who make up the largest part of fruit growers. They may lose out with increasing FDI in the agri-food chain because, firstly, the fixed transaction cost component in the costs of exchanges between farms and retailers makes it more costly for retailers to deal with a large number of small farmers than with a few bigger suppliers. Secondly, small farmers tend to be more constrained in their means for making necessary investments, because they lack sufficient own resources or they cannot access external funds in imperfect rural financial markets. Hence, small farmers may find it hard to increase their productivity and come up to the standards and sell to supermarkets. Studies from emerging markets in Latin America, suggest that these pressures may be real and important (Dries et al., 2004). <figure/>Because of the low level of organisation of growers, the weak marketing infrastructure and increased the significance of hypermarket chains imports of fresh fruit and vegetables increase, while the limitations to increase exports of fruit to EU-15 persist in the short term due to insufficient competitiveness, product range, etc. (Duponcel, 2004). Against the background of Poland being a leading fruit producer in the EU with a potential competitive advantage in exports of frozen products, canned products and fruit juices (Duponcel, 2004), and the high levels of FDI in the food and agri-processing industry (Csaki et al., 2004), it seems interesting to find out how and to what extent FDI in the agri-food chain could help increasing the competitiveness of Polish fruit growers and bring about structural change. It is assumed that understanding variations in technical efficiency provides a basis for predicting structural change (Gorton and Davidova, 2004). <heading>2.5 FDI, vertical integration and grower restructuring</heading>In general, the term vertical integration refers to bringing together two or more successive stages of the vertical production and distribution chain under common ownership and management (Gow and Swinnen, 1998). FDI-induced vertical integration refers to private institutional innovations that help overcome problems of exchange systems and contract enforcement mechanisms which have broken down in many CEECs (Dries and Swinnen, 2004). Generally, private investment by foreign processing and retail companies having the know-how and finance to upgrade capital technology and management (Konings, 2001), has proved to be an important driver of change and growth in the agri-food chain of some CEECs Supply or input contracts or assistance packages provided by foreign processors or retailers have brought about productivity and quality improvements and fostered restructuring at the farm level (Wilkin et al., 2006). Foreign investors played an important role, for instance, in the Polish dairy sector in initiating institutional innovation in contracting and farm assistance programs (Dries and Swinnen, 2004). The payments to the foreign investors who provide support to their suppliers are enforced by interlinking output and input markets: Assistance packages are restricted to suppliers to the company and part of an (implicit) contract between the farm and the company. The FDI-induced vertical integration between supplier and company enhances the farms' access to basic inputs, credit, and output markets, while it ensures timely delivery and high-quality supplies for the company (Dries and Swinnen, 2004) In the fruit sector vertical integration of growers and export traders leads to better institutionalisation and stabilisation of the food market (Wilkin et al., 2006), and helps take over wholesaling functions (Maack, 2005) since the wholesale system in this sector, as mentioned above, is very weak. Small farmers continue to be unable to make basic investments and are restricted in their access to basic inputs due to a variety of market imperfections, which makes them less likely to invest than larger farms (Dries and Swinnen, 2002). Retailers and processors may assist fruit growers with trade credits, inputs, extension services, and even bank loan guarantees to upgrade their capacities so as to produce and deliver products of high quality and, increasingly, food safety standards (Dries et al., 2004). In this context, Driesal. (2004) found that multinational retailers do invest in important local sourcing especially of fresh products such as fresh fruit and vegetables. The assistance packages were more likely to be provided in markets where small/medium sized farms dominate and where there was a shortage of high quality suppliers. The latter applies to the Polish fruit sector which suggests that Polish fruit growers may indeed become beneficiaries of FDI in the Polish agri-food chain; and this is what this study intents to find out. However, small and undercapitalised Polish growers may have to face major challenges resulting from FDI (Dries et al., 2004). Studies in developing countries found the impact of FDI on small suppliers to be negative as they often cannot comply with the higher standards and grading requirements for the supplied products. Moreover, foreign investors prefer to deal with a few large suppliers to minimize transaction costs, forcing consolidation of the supplier base and hence separating many small suppliers from their traditional outlets show (Dries and Swinnen, 2004). <heading>2.6 Spill-over effects</heading>Spill-over effects occur when local firms benefit from the multinational companies' superior knowledge of product or process technologies or markets, without incurring a cost that exhausts the whole gain from the improvement (Gow and Swinnen, 1998). Dries and Swinnen (2004) find evidence for strong spill-over effects, both vertically and horizontally in the Polish dairy sector. Horizontal spill-over effects occur when domestic companies start copying foreign management innovations (Swinnen , 2004) and technologies (Dries and Swinnen, 2004). Jointly these investments can improve quality, efficiency and competitiveness of the Polish agri-food chain (Swinnen , 2004). FDI may force domestic firms to provide similar contracts and services to farmers as the foreign companies do in order to maintain a sufficiently large supply base which is especially important in transition countries where there is typically a shortage of quality supplies (Gow and Swinnen, 1998). As a result the international competitiveness of the farms that are able to upgrade to meet the demands of modern retailers increases (Dries et al., 2004). This study is concerned with direct and indirect vertical spill-over effects and their impact on the technical efficiency of Polish fruit growers. Direct spill-over effects arise when foreign companies help raising the productivity and efficiency of local suppliers by providing extension services and technical assistance (Dries and Swinnen, 2004) i.e. information to raise the quality of suppliers' products or to facilitate innovations. Moreover, they may provide or assist suppliers in purchasing inputs (Gow and Swinnen, 1998) through financial assistance e.g. by co-signing bank loans (Dries and Swinnen, 2002). Effects may also occur as suppliers are forced to meet the higher standards of the foreign companies e.g. regarding quality and reliability of delivery. FDI induced vertical integration can lead to a wide and rapid spread of spill-over effects in the primary production sector as the demonstration of new technologies increases the know-how of domestic companies which, in combination with increased competition, forces them to operate more efficiently in turn impacting on the primary sector (Gow and Swinnen, 1998). Gow and Swinnen (1998) found that FDI in CEECs' agri-processing reduces hold-up and under-investment problems and increases the efficiency of agricultural production through the introduction of managerial improvements and innovative contracting with producers, and the simultaneous inflow of capital in the agri-food chain. Indirect vertical spill-over effects arise e.g. when assistance to input supply indirectly impacts on farm activities and investments by affecting the overall profitability of the farms, and their loan guarantee programs, affecting the access to bank loans of the farms (Dries and Swinnen, 2004). Moreover, FDI imposes an efficient corporate governance on farms because it hardens the budget constraints which, in conjunction reduced financial links between the Polish government and the domestic farms, may lead to better performance (Konings, 2001) and thus better technical efficiency. <heading>2.7 Conclusion</heading>Poland is a leading European fruit producer and has the capability to grow all types of temperate fruit. The lack of a comprehensive wholesale marketing system has led to both growers and foreign investors in the Polish agri-food chain vertically integrating and thus taking over the wholesaling functions. This kind of cooperation may encompass extension services, technical assistance, financial support and input supply potentially affecting growers' technical efficiency and hence their overall profitability. The objective of this study will be to find out whether and to what extent Polish fruit growers actually benefit from this cooperation. 