<heading>Introduction</heading>This essay is concerned with a description and evaluation of the agricultural development strategy of Mauritius in the period between 1970 and 2000 is. A brief introduction to the island, is followed by the paradigms that were underlying agricultural policies in Africa at the time. Finally the different policies and their outcomes are evaluated. <heading>Reality </heading>The small island state of Mauritius is located in the south west region of the Indian Ocean. Mauritius' total area is around 2,040 km 2 out of which around two fifths of are under cultivation (WTO, 2001). Its climate is tropical, with attendant disease burdens and problems with tropical agriculture. Mauritius was visited by cyclones in 1970, late-1975, and early-1980; by drought in 1983; and by a cyclone in 1984 all of which severely damaged crops (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). In 1968, Mauritius proclaimed independence. At this point in time the country was poor with a per capita income of about US$260 (Worldbank, 2005). Moreover, the pattern of asset and income distribution was very skewed. The thirty large sugar plantations were owned by Franco-Mauritians and accounted for nearly half of the total cultivable area (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). Since the 1960's Mauritius witnessed rapid growth in population as depicted in Table 1. <table/>Being a small island, Mauritius is subject to a range of problems that are associated with small economies. Economic activity is less diversified and a small domestic resource base limits the capacity for transformation. The small economy suffers from diseconomies of scale and its small domestic market limits the opportunities for economic development (Chernoff and Warner, 2002). Sugar is the dominant commodity in Mauritius both for the agricultural sector and the economy overall (Beintema, et al., 2003). Mauritius's share in the EEC quota is 38 percent, under the Lomé Convention signed in 1975 by the EEC and African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) countries. The price guaranteed by the EEC to ACP countries is equal to the producer price for European beet sugar producers, which means that it is more stable and usually higher than world prices (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). Mauritius' high dependence on one export commodity, leads to vulnerability to external shocks and natural hazards (Chernoff and Warner, 2002). <heading>Ideology of development</heading>In this section the respective development paradigms prevailing in Africa at the time are being described. Since the 1970s the basic human needs paradigm prevailed. It gave priority to the allocation of programmatic and public investment resources. In particular increased self-sufficiency was to be achieved by promoting national food production. The paradigm was part of "the growth-with-equity era since 1970" that was linked with the commodity boom and heightened rural inequality. It argued that improving the welfare, education, technical knowledge, and active participation of all people will increase both productive capacity and actual production more than growth strategies that rely on trickle-down for transmission of benefits. Subsidies for basic foods and redistributive policies were the chosen instruments (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990) As from 1979 the Mauritian economy was marked by recession inflation, sharply increased unemployment. A Structural adjustment (SA) program was formulated in conjunction with and supported by the World Bank and IMF (Bowman, 1991). The paradigm underlying SA programs saw emerging agricultural and overall development problems as the result of artificially distorted price incentives, that asked for measures to promote macroeconomic balance through aggregate demand management (Delgado, 1995). However, in case of Mauritius the SA programme primarily encompassed institutional improvements in the export sector (Bundoo and Dabee, 1999). The paradigm that emerged in the 1980s can be loosely termed "supply-shifters," in reference to an earlier terminology concerning those non-price factors that shift agricultural production functions upward, leading to more output for the same inputs. Public investment in research, extension, and infrastructure were boosted in order to provide more support to agricultural production, while R&D started to focus on the food side of the agricultural sector (Delgado, 1995). Finally, in the 1990s the sustainable development (SD) paradigm emerged. Great emphasis was placed on the widespread degradation of the agricultural resource base in Africa and the relationship of such degradation to externalities. SD is concerned with rapid population growth, agricultural income stagnation, and environmental degradation of rural areas (Delgado, 1995). <heading>Policies for agricultural development</heading>This section covers the policies pursued by the Mauritian government in the period concerned. <heading>Regulations</heading>As part of the government's policy to maintain high levels of employment, planters were obliged by law to maintain a regular work force all year around and to maintain at least 15 percent of the supplementary labour hired during the harvest season. Workers in the sugar sector received higher compensation compared with manufacturing, because of large non-wage benefits for sugar workers, reflecting the impact of stronger trade unions in this industry (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). Wages were also higher because since 1974, the real purchasing power of workers in the economy had to be maintained through the cost of living allowance or adjustment (YeungLamKo, 1998). <heading>Output price policy</heading>Agricultural land was scarce with most of cultivable land already being in use in the 1970s (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). The government employed output price policies to promote agricultural diversification so as to reallocate the land and use it more efficiently and to achieve food self-sufficiency. Therefore, the Agricultural Marketing Board (AMB) guaranteed prices to farmers at remunerative levels (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). The food crops promoted were to substitute imports, they included potatoes, maize, cassava, spices, fruit, and vegetables (WTO, 2001). Some of the crops could be grown between the rows of sugar cane (interline cultivation), while others could be grown on land that was agronomically unsuitable for sugar. Having achieved self-sufficiency in some crops by raising prices very sharply during the 1970s, the government reversed its price policy in the 1980s. The guaranteed real price for e.g. potatoes and onions were reduced sharply, while the real maize price was raised by 38 percent during 1980 to 1986 (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). <heading>Taxes and subsidies</heading>The government taxed sugar exports as from the early 1970s in order to generate rererevenue (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). A subsidiary objective was to promote diversification in production by reducing the relative rate of return of investment in sugar. As from 1975, small planters were exempted from the tax which was further broadened in 1985 and the principle of progression was introduced in the rate structure. The objective was to achieve a more equitable distribution of income in the agricultural sector, as well as to extract funds from agriculture for investment in the manufacturing sector (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990) in order to overcome the problem of a small domestic resource base (Chernoff and Warner, 2002). As regards subsidies, they were applied to wheat and rice to target poor consumers, which were in the 1970s primarily smallholder farmers. The subsidies made up about 21% of the recurrent government budget. Moreover, the poor benefited from tax exemptions and subsidies on electricity rates and water (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). In the 1980s, when the government wanted to reduce its budget deficit (YeungLamKo, 1998), the subsidies on consumer prices of rice and wheat flour were phased out (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). <heading>Variable input policy</heading>In the context of its diversification program away from sugar cane, the government provided input support in particular for food crops and tea and tobacco as export crops. Planting materials and products subject to price controls were eligible for subsidy (WTO, 2001). The greatest effort was put into the tea industry. As from 1980, planters received compensation to cover land preparation costs and monthly financial assistance from the time of uprooting to the time of harvest. Small tea planters received a complex fertilizer grant, winter assistance, and special endof-year assistance. As from 1986, the government subsidised tea production for export. Still, in the late 1980s world prices fell and tea production and export earnings declined substantially (Library of Congress, 1994). As from 2000, the financial assistance, including subsidies and fertilizer grants, was terminated in the tea branch (WTO, 2001). As regards water, irrigation systems are provided by the state in needy areas whereas around 20-25% of the costs are recovered from the beneficiaries (WTO, 2001). <heading>Trade policy and marketing policies</heading>Since 1978, imports were generally limited through quotas in order to raise the domestic price above import prices and alleviate balance of payments problems (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). For food self-sufficiency purposes, Mauritius maintained import, export, and price controls, and strategic reserve stocks on certain agricultural products. Moreover, marketing boards were in place and monopolies have been granted to certain public enterprises over the importation of certain products (WTO, 2001). These parastatals influenced prices by direct controls on the price formation, marketing, and storage of sugar, tea and tobacco. The parastatals included the Tea Board, Tobacco Board and AMB. The latter had export and import monopolies so as to administer producer and domestic sales prices, respectively (WTO, 2001). The objectives of the marketing policies were to improve quality and reach minimum standards which was particularly important in case of sugar having access to preferential EEC prices and therefore being subject to rigorous quality norms (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). Sugar revenues were shared according to a fixed rate (Larson and Borrell, 2001). The parastatals' duties also include arbitrating differences between millers and planters, operating the bulk sugar terminal, providing insurance to millers and planters, funding projects to increase cane productivity, and providing an equipment pool for the planters. All sugar is marketed by the Mauritius Sugar Syndicate, whereas the syndicate pays marketing charges such as crop insurance, the export duty to the government, and marketing and freight expenses from the sale proceeds. The rest of the proceeds are paid directly to the estates and planters, whereas the planters are paid 74% and the factory gets the remainder (Bowman, 1991). The Tea Board regulates and controls, the production of green leaf, and the manufacture, marketing, imports, and exports of tea. It also sets the conditions of contracts entered into by planters, metayers and manufacturers. The producer price of green leaf is set annually and varies from one region to another (WTO, 2001). <heading>Agricultural Technology, Research and Extension Policy</heading>Historically, the great majority of agricultural R&D in Mauritius has been funded from national sources (Beintema, et al., 2003). Sugar research accounts for more than half the domestic agricultural research spending (Beintema, et al., 2003). The sugar industry participates in financing R&D, under the premise to have a voice in setting research priorities (Larson and Borrell, 2001). The industry benefits form the sophisticated research and publication program carried out by the Mauritius Sugar Industry Research Institute which maintains research divisions in plant breeding, botany and irrigation, pathology, entomology, soils and plant nutrition, cane and foodcrop agronomy, biometry and sugar technology. Together with the School of Agriculture of the University of Mauritius, much attention was devoted to improving productivity, reducing production costs, and developing expertise on growing food crops within interlines (Beintema, et al., 2003). The consequent diffusion of technical information to ease technology adoption farmers was done by extension services and farmers' service centres (Bowman, 1991). <heading>Land Reform Policy</heading>As regards the ownership structure of land, the social status quo has largely been maintained. Prevailing land tenure forms are private ownership and corporate ownership such as plantations and states. There are large sugar estates which are for the most part owned by about 2 percent of the population - namely the Franco-Mauritians (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). As of 1987, there were 19 large estates covering 51% of the cane area and growing 59% of the cane. The rest of the cane area is owned by individual planters out of which over 90% own less than 5 five acres. <heading>Credit Policy </heading>In order to alleviate a critical constraint hampering growth in agricultural output and in conjunction with the diversification program, small holders obtained interest-free credit by the respective Marketing Board for the purchase of agricultural inputs (including fertilizers and pesticides) used in the production, e.g. of tobacco (WTO, 2001). As from 1983, the credit allocated by the government to each bank was based on the amount lent to the priority sectors which included, inter alia, the sugar industry and agriculture (Bundoo and Dabee, 1999). As from 1983, the credit allocated by the government to each bank was based on the amount lent to the priority sectors which included, inter alia, the sugar industry and agriculture (Bundoo and Dabee, 1999). <heading>Outcomes </heading>This section reviews the outcomes of the agricultural policies. <heading>Regulations</heading>The labour laws constitute impediments to the further development of the sugar industry as they - along with special land market regulations, and other regulations specific to the sugar industry - lock in resources to ensure that the sugar production meets its EU quota (Beintema, et al., 2003). Hence, productivity enhancing diversification is limited (Larson and Borrell, 2001). In connection with the structure of taxation, the labour legislation generated a powerful incentive to break up sugar estates into relatively inefficient small holdings (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). As a consequence, the World Trade Organisation recommended in 2001 to group the small planters so as to maintain output and profitability and improve productivity (WTO, 2001). The labour laws also constituted a financial burden on large planters who had their profitability considerably reduced as wages and salaries constituted over 50 percent of operating costs. Moreover, as workers were compensated for any increase in prices occurring it the economy, wages and salaries were automatically indexed to the consumer price index which led to substantial inflation (YeungLamKo, 1998). Finally, although legislation aimed at protecting existing sugar workers on the estates it created an incentive for management to mechanize rather than hire more labour (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). <heading>Output price policy</heading>The economics of the output price policies associated with the diversification program are difficult to assess, as sugar estate owners were obliged by law to retain workers through the slack season which they utilised to grow the food crops during this period (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). The estates have indeed made some efforts to expand interline cropping and to rent land to small farmers, but there is only limited incentive to diversify as long as sugar production is profitable to both large and small producers (Bowman, 1991). Some agricultural diversification has taken place with the production of potatoes, peanuts, and peas in the "inter-lines" of the sugar cane fields for domestic consumption. However, the fact that these crops do not earn export income (YeungLamKo, 1998) means that the diversification strategy away from sugar and towards import substituting crops has contributed to a decline in the importance of agriculture in the economy. Despite of that, sugar remains a leading industry (WTO, 2001). <heading>Taxes and subsidies</heading>The government has been successful in improving social indicators and achieving income distribution by means of the sugar tax (Mistry, 1999). However, its rate structure discriminated against the relatively efficient large estates and, in conjunction with labour legislation, provided an incentive to split them up (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). The tax could be justified in the light of Mauritius's limited quota in the EEC preferential market and the low demand for sugar in the world free market. Providing strong incentives to expand sugar production or to allow owners of sugar estates to retain the rent created by the EEC preferential price would not have been sensible (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). Moreover, the sugar tax helped redistribute incomes and supported small holder farmers. It led to and improvement of the lives of workers without increasing wages so much that potential investors would turn away (Meisenhelder, 1997). As regards the consumer subsidies on food crops and water and electricity, they were not confined to low-income groups, and there were considerable leakages to middle- and upper-income groups. Apparently, subsidized foods were also used as animal feed. Inspite of these inefficiencies, alimentary status and welfare increased among low-income groups have increased substantially (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). <heading>Variable input policy</heading>As input subsidies are regressive in their effect on income distribution, they benefit most those farmers who use more of the input and these will tend to be the wealthier farmers and the large sugar estates (Ellis, 1992). Moreover, the policy has increased the problem of water pollution with agro-chemicals which has been a long-term concern for the sugar-industry, other farmers and all users of water since the 1990s (Bowman, 1991). <heading>Trade policy and marketing policies</heading>The creation of parastatals led to public sector inefficiencies because as enterprises they did not place much emphasis on efficiency. Moreover, most of them were characterised by overstaffing (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). In case of sugar, the practice of sharing revenues according to a fixed rate created disincentives to improve milling efficiency. A portion of the efficiency gains generated by new investments in sugar mills accrues to the cane growers, but in Mauritius improvements in milling efficiency were effectively being taxed (Larson and Borrell, 2001). <heading>Agricultural Technology, Research and Extension Policy</heading>Although, level of investment in research is high, agricultural research spending and staffing levels have decreased in the past few years with the contraction of domestic and international funding (Beintema, et al., 2003). In 2000, Mauritius invested $3.96 for every $100 of agricultural output. This increase was the combined result of increased spending in agricultural R&D and declining agricultural GDP (after adjustment for inflation). The 1995 ratio was more than twice the African average of 0.9 percent and close to the average for the developed world of about 2.6%. <heading>Land Reform Policy</heading>The government intervenes in the land distribution in order to offset the loss of some 500 ha per year of land area under sugar cane to residential and industrial development. This is partially offset by a gradual increase in the area under irrigation and by bringing land under cultivation through derocking (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). As regards the extreme concentrations of landownership, Franco-Mauritians, who make up 2% of the population, still own or control over 65% of the stock of productive assets and over 75% percent of the land area. This may limit Mauritius from achieving its full potential and it may have adverse affects on future growth and transformation (Mistry, 1999). However, there is efficiency case for large land estates because of the economies of scale associated with the larger estates since the productivity of the small planters is approx. 25% less than that of the plantations (Bowman, 1991). <heading>Credit Policy</heading>The practice that credits were allocated to the banks was based on the amount lent to the priority sectors created a bias, inducing banks to lend more to the priority sectors, i.e. the sugar industry and agriculture (Bundoo and Dabee, 1999). This means that resources were locked in these priority sectors, possibly impeding the development of other non-prioritised sectors. <heading>Other issues</heading>Other problems that Mauritian agriculture has to face since the late 1990s include a general decrease in the share of agriculture (including sugar industry, fisheries, livestock, and forestry) (WTO, 2001) as depicted in Graph 1. <figure/>Other problems include increasing production costs, high costs of centralization through a heavy and costly institutional framework financed by revenue from the global recession, and cumbersome land conversion procedures (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). The rapid job creation in the Mauritian economy for the last two decades meant that Mauritius is now a labour scarce rather than labour surplus economy. As a consequence small planters lack seasonal labour to harvest the sugar (Subramanian and Roy, 2001). <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>Mauritius has, to some extent, been successful in boosting its sugar industry, while at the same time extracting resources from it for further economic development. However, the sector is now facing constraints to further growth and, in view of the phasing out of preferential arrangements with developed countries, it requires further diversification within the sector and away from agriculture in general to find new sources of growth. Moreover, the skewed pattern of ownership of land constitutes a major constraint to agricultural and economic diversification, and to a more equitable distribution of income among the rural population. 