As children attempt their first words, their pronunciation seems to fall short of the corresponding adult word forms. It is assumed that children already perceived and stored adult representations that they can map onto before they start producing words; and they gradually adjust their pronunciation to approximate towards the adult target word forms through time and practice. In the progress of acquiring and mastering the full range of articulatory programs, children simplify adult word forms in their production to fit their abilities. Regularities in children's speech can be noted. In earlier studies, Jespersen (1922) managed to observe children's tendency to replace velar stops with alveolar stops and he specified this general pattern as one of the sound-laws in operation in phonological development. In the late 1960's, Stampe (1969) referred these sound-laws as phonological processes in his theory of Natural Phonology. <quote>A phonological process is a mental operation that applies in speech to substitute, for a class of sounds or sound sequence presenting a specific common difficulty to the speech capacity of the individual, an alternative class identical but lacking the difficult property. (Stampe, 1979:1)</quote>He further defined that 'phonological processes are mental operations performed on behalf of the physical systems involved in speech perception and production (Stampe, 1979:9). 'These processes manifest themselves as a cerebral system of prosodic mappings and phonetic features substitutions which govern the perception, representation, and production of speech' (Bright, 1992). Stampe's theory is related to the Complete Perception Theory and involves two levels of representation that is the child's perceptual organization of the adult language and the child's phonetic representation or output (Ingram, 1989). These phonological processes simplify the accurate phonological representations of the adult surface form, resulting the production of reduced child form. He described these phonological processes as a set of hierarchically ordered procedures, with some processes being more basic than others, and is phonetically motivated but he did not provide a list of the universal processes. In order to bring his pronunciation closer to the adult form, the child operates three possible mechanisms of change upon the innate phonological system (Ingram 1989). The first mechanism of change is ordering, which is by imposing a restriction on the natural order of application of the processes so that the application of one process eliminates one of the contexts in which another process normally applies. The second mechanism of change is limitation, where the child limits the range of segments or context in which a process applies. The third mechanism is suppression, where a phonological process or the sequence of processes is suppressed. It was claimed by Stampe that the different degrees of limitation and suppression of phonological processes in individual children accounts for individual variation in phonological acquisition. The loss of phonological processes occurs gradually in phonological development. Ingram (1976) further attempts to describe the phonological patterns in children's speech through the establishment of phonological patterns. He proposed three general categories of phonological processes, which are (a) substitution processes, (b) assimilatory processes, and (c) syllable structure processes. Elaborations of these processes along with common processes found in children within and across languages are found below. <heading>Substitution processes (replacement of one segment). </heading><heading>Stopping</heading>Fricatives and occasionally other sounds being replaced with stop consonants. For example: sea being produced as [tiː] <heading>Fronting</heading>Velar and palatal consonants being replaced with alveolar consonants For example: kiss being produced as [tɪs] <heading>Gliding</heading>Liquids [l] or [r] are being replaced with glides [w] or [j] For example: ready being produced as [wedi] leg being produces as [jek] <heading>Vocalization</heading>A syllabic consonant being replaced with a vowel For example: button being produced as [bʌtʌ] <heading>Assimilatory processes (assimilate one segment in a word to another)</heading><heading>Voicing (context sensitive)</heading>Consonants preceding a vowel tend to be voiced, and consonants at the end of a syllable tend to be devoiced For example: pig being produced as [bik] <heading>Consonant harmony</heading>This involves assimilation in place of articulation as well as manner of articulation. It was found that the there is a strength hierarchy that determines the direction of assimilation with velar being the strongest consonants to be assimilated to, followed by labial and dental being the weakest consonants with greater tendency to become homorganic with stronger consonants (Menn, 1975). Frequent patterns of assimilation are: <heading>Velar assimilation </heading>Apical consonant tend to assimilate to a neighboring velar consonant For example: duck being produced as [gʌk] <heading>Labial assimilation</heading>Apical consonant tend to assimilate to a neighboring labial consonant For example: tub being produced as [bʌb] <heading>Progressive vowel assimilation</heading>Unstressed vowel will assimilate to preceding or following stressed vowels For example: hammer being produced as [haːma] This process is usually lost early as vowels develop rapidly. <heading>Syllable structure processes (motivated to simplify syllable structure towards a basic CV syllable)</heading><heading>Cluster reduction</heading>A consonant cluster is reduced to a single consonant, with the tendency of the sonorant being deleted when it occurs together with a stop consonant, and in nasal and stop clusters, nasal tends to be retained if the stop is voiced and will be dropped if the stop is voiceless. For example: play being produced as [pe] <heading>Deletion of final consonants</heading>The final consonant in the word is omitted. A word final cluster may be reduced to one consonant or no consonant For example: desk being produced as [de] or [des] <heading>Deletion of unstressed syllables</heading>An unstressed syllable is deleted, especially if it precedes a stressed syllable For example: banana being produced as [nænæ] <heading>Reduplication</heading>Initial CV syllable is repeated in multisyllabic word For example: water being produced as [wawa] Partial reduplication can also occur where the consonant is reduplicated For example: blanket being produced as [babi] The advantage of phonological processes approach is that it attempts to explain the specific patterns found in the speech of children. It has been found useful in analyzing children's phonological system and in describing the systematic productions in normal speech development. Phonological processes is not only used to analyze normal developing children but also phonologically disordered children where clinically disordered speech errors are distinguished from predictable pronunciation errors or regular sound changes that occur during normal phonological development. A number of process-based assessment procedures are available such as the Assessment of Phonological Processes by Barbara Hudson (1986) and the more recent Clinical Assessment of Articulation and Phonology (CAAP) by Wayne Secord and JoAnn Donohue ( URL ), which are useful assessment tool to detect phonological disorder in children. Stampes's phonological processes support Jakobson's law of irreversible solidarity (Ingram, 1989). He noted that Jakobson's law is a subset of phonological processes which are context-free. Despite the usefulness of phonological processes, there are still some unresolved issues, disadvantages and limitations. One of the limitations is that phonological processes reflect the performance in phonological acquisition rather than the actual phonological competence in the child. The real existence of these processes in the perceptual level are yet to confirmed or proven. It is also arguable of what constitute a phonological process, how many frequencies of similar examples are required, in order to be considered as part of a typical phonological development. In a way, origins of atypical sound changes need to be determined. It is inadequate to state that the child's word forms that are being produced are adult word representations going through phonological processes. Ingram (1989:233) argues that 'children actively operate on adult forms to establish their own phonological representations of these words'. Ingram gave the example of Philip who was still producing [gege] for cookie even though there were other evidence showing that he should be able to pronounce cookie correctly. Ingram further explained that this persistent frozen form was due to the establishment of this form as his own representation of the word cookie, where this representation becomes resistant to phonological processes. This active organization of the representation of words and the effort in constructing a system of his own that is different from the adult model supports the existence of peculiar speech patterns found in individual children which cannot be analyze using the universal phonological processes. In conditions where a child managed to produce advanced forms with pronunciation better than the expected phonological abilities, Ingram proposed that the child has not yet establish a representation and that it has not yet conformed to the child's system. Phonological processes cannot always be stated generally for it is necessary to take into account the words which they affect (Ingram, 1989). The more complex and the more recent the word was acquired contributes to higher variability in pronunciation. It can also be observed that children's phonological system is not static but is dynamic and constantly under change leading to phonetic variability where children show a variety of productions for the same words. This leads to the disadvantage of being insufficient in just isolating phonological processes. Percentage of operation of the phonological processes need to calculated to account for phonetic mobility. It is assumed that phonological processes are isomorphic processes where each element of the adult form corresponds one-to-one with each element of the child form which was mentioned above. But there are some unusual non-isomorphic processes with nonsystematic mappings and unruly reductions. This leads to the production of progressive phonological idioms, where the ability to produce complex sequences of segments does not generalize to other similar words (Mozkowitz, 1970). Although children have the same set of phonological processes, production of unusual words can still be observed. This is because individual child shows individual phonological preference for a specific articulatory pattern, which can be a particular class of sounds such as fricatives [s] or a particular kind of syllable structure, for example (CVjCV) shown in Christopher, which is another good case showing non-isomorphic processes (Priestley, 1977). There also may have variation of the preferred sounds dependent on the place in a word. Some children prefers initial and medial consonants and avoid final consonants by reduplicating vowels (Ross, 1937), while some others prefers medial and final consonants where initial consonants are omitted or replaced by [h] (Stern and Stern, 1928). There are evidence showing that phonological preference of sounds and syllables sequence is parallel to those frequently used in babbling (Elbers, 1982). When there is preference for certain sounds, there is also avoidance of words that contain sounds that the child cannot currently produce. Schwartz and Leonard (1982) has conducted an experiment where 12 children were taught nonsense words consisting sounds that were part of the children's phonological system (IN words) and sounds that are not yet produced by the children. Results showed that the children produced more IN words than OUT words in both imitated and non-imitated context. The children were also tested for comprehension of both group of words and no difference were found. This demonstrated the existence of preference towards certain sounds and avoidance of other sounds. In conclusion, there is no single definition of phonological process but it is generally referred as a systematic sound change to simplify words in order to produce more intelligible words according to the capability of the child. It has been used extensively to analyze children's phonological system. Some children may follow very closely the adult phonology models and uses the most general phonological processes. But there are some occasions where unusual words are being produced which does not conform to phonological processes. In general, children have similar set of phonological processes and they appear to choose and apply in very different ways based on individual phonological preferences and avoidances, resulting the productions of a variety of speech forms. 