<heading>Introduction</heading><heading>1.1 Aims</heading>In this project, I aim to construct two corpra from a selection of Tony Blair's political speeches made in Britain and abroad and compare them to examine how Tony Blair's use of the 'we' and 'I' pronouns in these speeches show both his own and his audience's membership to a particular social group or groups. <heading>1.2 Questions to be asked</heading>In this project, I will address the following questions - 1. Is there a way each pronoun is used to signify membership to a particular social group? 2. Is there a difference in the way each pronoun is used depending on whether the speech is in Britain or abroad? 3. Is the use of the 'we' and 'I' pronouns representative of planned speech in general? With the answers to these questions, I will be able to formulate an answer to my main question - "How does Tony Blair's use of the 'I' and 'we' pronouns in his political speeches demonstrate his own and his audiences membership to a particular social group or groups?" <heading>2.0 Method</heading><heading>2.1 Planning the Corpra</heading>When deciding how to construct the corpra and the larger corpus they combine to create I decided to take two things into consideration - making sure I had a corpus size I could work with and making sure I had a corpus suitable to answer the questions put forward in section 1.2. <heading>2.11 Suitability of the Corpus</heading>It is clear from the questions put forward in section 1.2 that this corpus is for a very specific purpose. Ghadessy, Henry and Roseberry (2001) write a specialised corpus is "delimited by a specific register, discourse domain or subject matter". From that definition it is clear the corpus I aim to construct for this project is a specialised corpus. Clear, writing in Leitner states "The more specific the purpose we have in mind for a corpus the better directed will be our data gathering". With this in mind, I felt the objectives of this project were clear and specific enough to begin constructing a specialised corpus. <heading>2.12 Size of the Corpus</heading>I decided that regarding the size of my corpus, I would concentrate not in terms of the number of words but the number of speeches I would use. Haan writing in Leitner (1992) agrees with this method writing "The suitability of the sample depends on the specific study undertaken and there is no such thing as a best or optimum sample size as such". With this in mind, I decided I wanted to create a representative sample of Blair's speeches throughout his time in office. I therefore chose to use two home speeches and two foreign speeches for each year Blair has been prime minister. This gave me a total of thirty six - eighteen for both the home and the foreign samples. Although this is an extremely large sample for the purposes of this project, I decided I would take a representative sample of each pronoun from both the home and foreign speeches to anaylse. The names and dates of the speeches chosen can be found in the bibliography section. This supplied me with two corpra - one of foreign speeches sized 126,541 word tokens and one of home speeches sized 39,113 to form a larger corpus of speeches of 165,654 word tokens which although is perhaps slightly to many for a project of this size, It is enough to provide me with a representative sample. <heading>2.2 Corpra construction</heading>To construct the corpra, I first used the AntConc concordancer program to determine the size of my sample by creating a wordlist before using the same program to construct the concordance lines, creating the following concordances from the corpus of speeches at home - <list>'we' pronoun in home speeches'I' pronoun in home speeches</list>And the following concordances from the corpus of speeches abroad - <list>'we' pronoun in foreign speeches'I' pronoun in foreign speeches</list>Finally, I chose the first fifty concordances from each sample for anaylsis as I felt this would give me a large enough sample to answer the questions posed in section 1.2 without distracting from the main objectives of the project. Although AntConc is a freeware program I felt it had enough features for a project of this size and type to perform adequately. <heading>3.0 Evaluation of results</heading><heading>3.1 The 'we' pronoun</heading><heading>3.11 Use of the 'we' pronoun in home speeches</heading>All data referred to in this section can be found in 6.11 of this project. The use of the 'we' pronoun in speeches at home is interesting, as it is used exclusively to signal membership to a group. This is perhaps to be expected given the nature of the 'we' pronoun in general but what is interesting is that in the home speeches 'we' is being used to refer to multiple groups, both of which the speaker is a member of. Examples of this are lines 4, 5 and 6 where the speaker is talking about problems faced by Britains and suggesting that he faces them as well as he also is British. However, lines 8, 11 and 15 are examples where the speaker is putting himself forward as a member of the government. What is interesting about the pronoun usage referring to the government is that it is used to suggest the government is either acting in a positive way or has acted in a way that has yielded positive results in the past. Examples of this can be seen in lines 16, 38 and 39. This would suggest that the speaker is choosing very carefully when to display membership to this particular group so that he is seen in as positive a light as possible. Switching the reference of pronouns in this way allows the speaker to simultaneously access two identities and use the positive connotations associated with each (in this case British citizen and government member). Mesthrie (2000) writes that language "constitutes a resource that may be drawn upon in interaction with others". In this case, the speaker is well aware of this and how and when to do so. Another interesting way in which the 'we' pronoun is used in this sample is as a way of suggesting the audience should be acting in a particular way. This is illustrated by lines 24 and 25. Here, in both cases the speaker is talking about protection using the 'we' pronoun. What this is suggesting is that the speaker personally is acting and that as the audience is a member of the same group as the speaker (in this case British) they should be acting in a way similar to the speaker if they view themselves as sharing the speaker's group and membership. Using language in this way can be seen as an example of the 'us-they' distinction. This is identified by Wardhaugh (1998) who writes language can either "express a we-type solidarity among participants", and therefore be suitable for  "in-group and informal activities" or be  "they-oriented" and therefore be considered  "appropriate to out-group and more formal relationships, particularly of an impersonal kind". <heading>3.12 Use of the 'we' pronoun in foreign speeches</heading>All data referred to in this section can be found in 6.21 of this project. The use of the 'we' pronoun in foreign speeches is interesting as it shares may features with the use of the pronoun in home speeches. Again it is used exclusively to signal membership to a group but also, like the home speeches sample the 'we' pronoun is used to refer to two groups the speaker is a member of. In the home speeches it was Britain and the government, in these speeches it is Europe and Britain. Most interestingly of all however is that in this sample the pronoun is used to refer to Britain in much the same way as it was used to refer to the government in the home speeches - to refer to some kind of positive action or process undertaken by that group (examples of which can be seen in lines 44 and 46). This is again an example of the speaker choosing carefully when to display his membership of a group. Here, as in the home speeches with the government group the British group is a group that most of the audience is not a member of. Indeed, it may be that the speaker is the only member of the group in the room he is addressing. If so, then the speaker is seen as the representative of the group and therefore could be in danger of face threatening attacks upon his group. (Face is defined in Mesthrie (2000) as "referring to a persons self image"). What the usage of the 'we' pronoun to refer to Britains and Europeans in each of the speech samples suggests is that appealing to any shared identities the speaker and the audience may have is an important strategy in speeches of this kind. In both samples, the speaker is trying to place himself and the audience in a shared group (see examples in the previous section and lines 1, 2, 3 and 6 for examples in this section). Therefore, by including the audience in the 'us' group the speaker is aiming to enforce common ground and shared identity. A different group membership can be seen in lines 32, 33 and 34. Here, the speaker is using the 'we' pronoun to refer to the government. In this situation, the speaker is under even more threat from face threatening acts as it is an even smaller group he is signalling his membership to. Therefore it is interesting to note that those three lines consist entirely of the speaker listing positive achievements of the group that would also be seen as positive from the shared values of the audience that is being addressed. This suggests that the larger the shared group and the more of the audience is in the 'us' group then the less the speaker feels in danger of face threatening attacks. More use of the 'we' pronoun in foreign than home speeches (792 to 620). What this seems to suggest is that the speaker is using more shared group references abroad than at home. This would in turn suggest that the speaker has more difficulty being seen as a member of the 'us' group abroad (European) than the 'us' group at home (British) and therefore uses more 'we' pronouns in an attempt to project themselves as part of that group. <heading>3.2 The 'I' pronoun</heading><heading>3.21 Use of the 'I' pronoun in home speeches</heading>All data referred to in this section can be found in 6.12 of this project. The 'I' pronoun appears to be used in quite a different way to the 'we' pronoun in the context of home speeches. While the 'we' pronoun was used to attempt to gain access to a shared identity, here the 'I' pronoun is not. Instead of being used to emphasize the speaker's membership to a particular group it is being used to emphasise the speaker's ability, experience and actions. Lines 10, 14, 20, 22, 39 and 46 are examples of this. If the 'we' pronoun is used to show the similarities between the speaker and the audience the 'I' pronoun is used for the opposite reason. In this case, the speaker is keen to show that he is a strong leader and suitable for being in charge of the country. If this is the standard way in which the pronoun is used, then there is another non-standard way that appears in several places across the sample. This is best illustrated by lines 3, 4, 5 and 15. Here, the speaker is using phrases like 'can I just say' and 'I hope you will forgive me'. These phrases could quite easily be shortened or even removed all together to make the speech more direct but they are not. Mesthrie (2000) writes that phrasing a request indirectly as the speaker is doing is an example of "negative politeness" which is defined as "not imposing on others or threatening their face" Furthermore, the fact that this usage is not the standard suggests it is a conscious decision for the speaker to use language in this way. Mesthrie (2000) points out researchers have "distinguished between 'unmarked' language choices, in which the language used is one that would be expected in that context and 'marked' choices, in which the language used would not normally be expected". In this context, it is clear that the use of the 'I' pronoun in this way would be a marked choice. Furthermore, Mesthrie also states that "marked choices may function as attempts to redefine aspects of the context or the relationship between speakers". This may explain why the speaker is using the pronoun in its marked form. The unmarked form is impersonal, focusing solely on the speakers own actions and achievements. If the speaker wanted to create a more personal atmosphere by making the audience feel more involved then switching to a marked choice like this would be helpful as by using negative politeness towards the audience the speaker is suggesting that their opinions matter to him and that he does not wish to impose upon them unnecessarily. This marked use of the pronoun is quite different from the unmarked choice, which is quite impersonal and distant. However, by making the choice to combine the two the speaker is again drawing upon the positive connotations of both styles. <heading>3.22 Use of the 'I' pronoun in foreign speeches</heading>All data referred to in this section can be found in 6.22 of this project. The use of the 'I' pronoun in foreign speeches shares a similar unmarked usage to the home speeches sample. There is a lot of emphasis on achievements and past actions. Examples of which are lines 6, 15, 16 and 17. However, the purpose seems slightly different. While in the home speeches it was to demonstrate the speaker's suitability as a leader of Britain, here it seems the speaker has to actively convince the audience that he is a committed member of their 'us' group (in this case European). Indeed, sometimes (such as lines 6, 7, 28 and 27) the text reads like a CV of past actions designed to signal shared values with the audience. This is different to the unmarked use in the home speeches which seems a lot less forceful. Also, there is less use of politeness and more direct speech. In-fact there are only two examples (lines 34 and 40) - 'I just say this' and 'I therefore particularly welcome'. These are much more direct than any of the examples in the home speeches. This would suggest that the speaker is less concerned with an informal speech style and more concerned with projecting a strong image of himself as a decisive leader and diplomat. Lines 43 and 44 support this, as in these examples the speaker is stating that he wants what he believes is best for Britain, regardless of the feelings of the larger 'us' group which is a direct face threatening act towards them. <heading>4.0 Comparison to larger corpra</heading>To determine if the results of my project are representative of planned speech as a whole, I decided to compare my findings to a larger corpus. As, the size of this project is limited, I decided to limit my investigation to a small, but representative sample. As the speech used in my project is planned speech I felt it would be best to compare my data to other planned speech. To do this, I used a sub-corprus of the BNC corpus titled "written to be spoken" compiled of planned speech. I used the internet tool Sketch Engine to search for the 'I' and 'we' pronouns and took a random sample of 15 concordances from each pronoun for evaluation. <heading>4.1 Comparison of the 'we' sample to BNC 'we' sample</heading>All data referred to in this section can be found in 6.31 of this project. In this sample, the pronoun is used mainly to signal shared group membership. Lines 5, 6, 12 and 15 are good examples of this, and similar to my findings from the Tony Blair speeches they are emphasising either past actions and achievements or an intention to act in a positive way in the future. Another example of how the 'we' pronoun is used can be seen in lines 1 and 10. Here, 'we' is being used by a 'spokesperson' speaking on behalf of a group of people. This is different from the usage identified in Blair's speeches, as although Blair could be seen as representing the British group, his speeches are not as direct in their representation as in this sample. This could possibly be due to the massive difference between group sizes and therefore the difficulty in directly representing every member of a group as large and diverse as the British public. <heading>4.2 Comparison of the 'I' sample to BNC 'I' sample</heading>All data referred to in this section can be found in 6.32 of this project. In this sample, although the 'I' pronoun is often used to emphasise personal experiences it is done in a different way than was discussed in the evaluation of the Tony Blair sample, as while there the 'I' pronoun was often used to place emphasis on positive achievements here it is not. Lines 2, 5, 11 and 12 are all examples of negative experiences which were not a feature of my sample of Blair's speeches. There are also examples of uncertainty on the part of the speaker, examples of which are lines 3, 9 and 11. This was not a feature of Blair's speeches, possibly because in the context of politics uncertainty is a highly undesirable trait. Also, as the text in this sample comes from a variety of contexts of planned speech it may be that some are aimed at a different audience where values perceived as negative in political speech (e.g. tentativeness and uncertainty) may be more highly valued. <heading>5.0 Conclusion</heading>In this project, I have successfully constructed a corpus for the task of determining specific patterns in the use of the 'I' and 'we' pronouns in Tony Blair's speeches relating to membership of various social groups. I have also related these findings to a larger corpus of planned language and evaluated the similarities and differences found between the two. In conclusion, I have shown there are very specific ways in which these pronouns are used in Tony Blair's speeches. This shows the speaker's awareness of his audience, as well as their attitudes towards him and the social groups he belongs to. Some features are shared by planned speech in general, although there are some features that appear only in the context of the political speeches made by Blair. If I were to perform a follow up study, it would be interesting to compare Blair's speeches to the speeches of other politicians to determine if the features identified relate to political speeches in general or are specific to the speeches of Tony Blair. <heading>6.0 Results</heading><heading>6.1 Concordances for Blair's home speeches</heading><heading>6.11 First 50 of 620 Concordances for the 'we' pronoun</heading><table/><heading>6.12 First 50 of 383 Concordances for the 'I' pronoun</heading><table/><heading>6.2 Concordances for Blair's foreign speeches</heading><heading>6.21 First 50 of 792 Concordances for the 'we' pronoun</heading><table/><heading>6.22 First 50 of 421 Concordances for the 'I' pronoun</heading><table/><heading>6.3 Random samples for the BNC written to be spoken sub-corpus</heading><heading>6.31 Random sample of 15 concordances for the 'we' pronoun</heading><table/><heading>6.32 Random sample of 15 concordances for the 'I' pronoun</heading><table/>