<heading>Introduction</heading><heading>1.1 Essay aims</heading>In this essay, I will first briefly define the concept of code-switching, before looking at the various social and linguistic factors contributing to code-switching. I will then take a more in-depth look at the various types of code-switching commonly found in discourse before commenting on my findings. <heading>1.2 W hat is a code and what is code switching? </heading>People rarely view languages or varieties of a language as a neutral concept. Indeed, Wardhaugh (1998) writes that "terms like dialect, language, style, standard language, pidgin and Creole are inclined to arouse emotions". When talking about language, it therefore seems prudent to have a neutral term that doesn't have so many potentially difficult emotional connotations. Wardhaugh (1998) defines the term 'code' as being able to refer to "any kind of system that two or more people employ for communication". Code-switching therefore, is defined by Wardhaugh (1998) as "shifting, as the need arises from one code to another". While this may seem obvious, the important thing is not that code-switching occurs - but rather the underlying reasons why people decide to code-switch. This can be in situations between two languages, or as Wardhaugh (1998) suggests "within sub-varieties of the same language". Therefore, it is important to note why people make the linguistic choice to code-switch at all, be it within a single language or between two distinct languages. <heading>Language choice</heading>Everyone, everywhere makes choices about the language they use, some of these are obvious such as using a different code when going for a job interview than the code employed whilst having a casual drink with friends while others choices are not so obvious. Mesthrie (2000) agrees with this and says that "language varieties constitute a resource that may be drawn on in interaction with others". Indeed, the example just given shows that to being to switch codes in this way is a valuable resource as using a code in the 'wrong' situation can be seen as highly inappropriate. So given that language is a resource that can be drawn upon, what this example also shows us is that people are obviously aware that certain codes are "correct" for certain situations, and that in these situations some codes are more highly valued than others. This then also suggests that the various codes employed by a language speaker all have some particular associations that suit them to the context they are used in. In her study of the German-Hungarian bi-lingual town of Oberwart Gal (1979) writes that the local Hungarian forms as opposed to standard Hungarian are "considered ideal for sincere, unassuming talk between native Oberwarters". This shows us that in Oberwart the local dialect is the preferred code for expressing honesty and sincereness, probably due the high solidarity using the local dialect creates. Holmes (2001) agrees with the idea that the various contexts people find themselves in help determine what code they use and states  "Certain social factors - who you are talking to, the social context of the talk, the function and topic of the discussion - turn out to be important for language choice in many different types of speech community". She also states that the social factors dictating what language is used in 'typical' interactions can be grouped into what is known as 'domains of language use'. <heading>2.1  Domains of Language use</heading>Holmes (2001) writes that "a domain involves typical interactions between typical participants in typical situations". A good example of domains of language use at work is in bi-lingual situations. Holmes gives the example of Paraguay. In Paraguay, most people in the cities are bi-lingual and use two languages - Guarani, which is the American Indian indigenous language, and Spanish which is the language of the colonisers. Furthermore, people tend to use one particular language in one situation and the other in a different situation. Spanish is the language used in education, administration and worship whilst Guarani is the language used in less formal situations such as telling a joke, or general gossip between friends. A general statement we can make from this data, is that it seems Spanish is the language preferred in more formal domains, whilst Guarani is the language preferred in more informal domains. Holmes writes of four scales that relate to how various domains are viewed. These are - the  solidarity  - social distance scale, the  status scale, the  formality scale and the  referential and affective function scales. Below, I will briefly outline each scale and explain how it relates to the relationship between Spanish and Guarani in Paraguay. <heading>2.12 The solidarity - social distance scale</heading>This scale can be illustrated as follows - <figure/>Holmes (2001) writes that this scale is "useful in emphasising that how well we know someone is a relevant factor in linguistic choices". Examples of this scale in action are decisions such as whether to call someone by their first name or full title - e.g. 'James' or 'Mr Smith'. In the situation of Spanish and Guarani, this scale would suggest that Guarani is the intimate/high solidarity language while Spanish is the distant/low solidarity language. This is because, if two Paraguayans were to meet in a neighbouring Spanish speaking country (hence one where Guarani is not an L1 or even an L2) using Guarani would be a way of expressing the intimacy and solidarity of their Paraguayan identity. <heading>2.13 The status scale</heading>This scale can be illustrated as follows - <figure/>Holmes (2001) writes that this scale "points to the relevance of relative status in some linguistic choices". The basis of this scale is the idea that when we are speaking to someone whom we acknowledge to be of a higher social status than us we will change our speech accordingly. An example of this is that in business, it is acceptable for someone in a higher position of authority to address someone in a lower position of authority by their first name, whereas that person in a lower position of authority would not be able to address their superior in this way and would have to use their full title. In Paraguay, as Spanish is the language of administration and business, it would be reasonable to assume that people would address someone in a position of authority in Spanish. However, if the person with the higher status wanted to change domains to one where status was not so important, they could do so by switching to Guarani. <heading>2.14 The formality scale</heading>This scale can be illustrated as follows - <figure/>Holmes (2001) writes that this scale is "useful in assessing the influence of the social setting or type of interaction on language choice". This scale suggests that language use is influenced by the formality of the situation. Indeed, as I mentioned earlier in this essay, the language used in a formal setting like a job interview will be very different than the language used in the informal setting of a causal drink with friends. Taking the example of Paraguay, we know that Spanish is the language preferred in domains of high formality as it is frequently used in domains such as Education, worship and administration while Guarani is used in domains of low formality such as gossiping and joke telling. <heading>2.15 The referential and affective function scales</heading>These scales can be illustrated as follows - Affective <figure/>Referential <figure/>These scales are concerned with the feelings of the speaker (affective) and the content of information within the speaker's utterance (referential). One example of this, is that while a lecture may be high in referential content, it will generally be low in affective content, as the main concern of the audience is not the feelings of the speaker but rather the information they are putting across. Holmes (2001) writes that "Language can convey objective information of a referential kind". What she means by this is that affective information can be given in a referential way - such as someone telling their friend their relationship has ended with their spouse when asked how they are feeling rather than simply saying "I feel bad" and that referential information can be given in an affective way - such as someone saying "some idiot ran into the back of me" instead of simply "I had an accident" when asked why their car has a dent into it. In terms of the example of Paraguay, again it seems that generally Spanish is preferred for pre-dominantly referential domains such as worship, education and administration while as Guarani is used in mostly affective ways such as joke telling it seems it is preferred for pre-dominantly affective domains. However, an interesting point is that most Paraguayans will use Guarani to gossip in, and while gossip is certainly affective speech there is also a high amount of referential content within it, thus supporting Holmes above claim. <heading>2.2  Domain leakage</heading>The scales in the previous section show that domain use is defiantly not clear cut and there are situations where a certain code is used outside of the expected domain. This is what is known as leakage. Holmes (2001) writes that often in Paraguay people at home will talk in Guarani as is expected for that domain, but as the language of education is Spanish they will switch to Spanish when discussing school work. Similarly, if someone in Paraguay was to visit an environment where Spanish was expected to be used, such as an administration office but knew the person working there they may make 'small talk' in Guarani before switching to Spanish. Overall, this shows that classifying situations into pre-packaged "domains" can often be problematic. It also shows that there are reasons other than domain change as to why speakers change code. <heading>3.0 Diglossia</heading>So far, I have given examples of code switching where separate languages are used for each code. When two languages are used in clearly different domains, such as the example of Guarani and Spanish in Paraguay given earlier it is known as Diglossia. Wardhaugh (1998) writes "A diglossic situation exists in a society when it has two distinct codes which show clear functional separation; that is, one code is employed in one set of circumstances and the other in an entirely different set" The important thing to note here is that in a Diglossic situation, the codes do not share the same function. Holmes (2001) Agrees and states that in the broader sense of Diglossia "Each variety is used for quite distinct functions; H and L complement each other". Holmes then explains that 'H' is typically the high, overtly prestigious variety while the 'L' is typically the low variety which although is not overtly prestigious may have a certain amount of covert prestige. Looking at Gal's study of Oberwart we can see that in this case, the 'H' language is German. Gal (1979) writes "While Hungarian is the language of the past and of the old, German is seen as the language of the future, of the young people that are most able to take advantage of the opportunities that Oberwarters feel exist in the German-speaking world". In this situation, the language that is spoken by an individual gives people information about how successful they are. Wardhaugh (1998) writes "Diglossia reinforces social distinctions. It is used to asset social position and how to keep people in their place, particularly people who are not and the upper end of the social hierarchy". Gal (1979) agrees with this saying that in Oberwart "Hungarian is considered a useless language because only peasant work is possible without a thorough knowledge of German" and furthermore "The expertise and knowledge required for employment, and the sophistication that Oberwarters associate with Austrian urban life and that they seek, are both represented by the German language". Another interesting point about Diglossic situations is picked up on by Holmes (2001) who writes "Often the grammar of the H is morphologically more complicated". This may explain why people view the 'H' variety as more prestigious than the 'L' variety, as in many people's minds to speak in a more 'complicated way signals intelligence. Holmes also notes that since the 'H' variety is used in more formal domains "The H variety contains many more formal and technical terms". What this means, is that in order to talk about technical objects and ideas people must change code to the 'H' variety. Eventually because of this, these objects and ideas become connected in people's minds with the language itself. Gal (1979) suggests this is one reason why Oberwarters view German in the way that they do - "The language itself has come to symbolize the higher status of the worker and the prestige and money than can be earned by wage work". <heading>Types of code-switching and their functions</heading>Up until this point, I have spoken about code-switching without making any reference to any technical terms for the types of switching or how these types differ from each other. In this section, I will talk about situational code switching and Metaphorical code switching in more detail. <heading>4.1 Situational Code-switching</heading>Coupland and Jaworksi (1997) dislike the term 'situational code-switching' writing "Situational code-switching could be regarded as changes in language choice rather than code-switching proper; it refers to language switches which coincide with a change of interlocutor, setting or topic" . Without an alternative definition of situational code-switching, it would seem that it is more a matter of code choice rather than actual code-switching. Wardhaugh defines situational code-switching between languages as follows - "Situational code-switching occurs when the languages used change according to the situations in which the conversants find themselves: they speak one language in one situation and another in a different one". From these definitions, it is clear the term 'situational code-switching' is about selecting the most appropriate code that the domain requires. These issues have already been discussed in section 2.0 of this essay as I have, for the reasons noted above preferred to classify situational code-switching under the term 'language choice'. <heading>4.2 Metaphorical code-switching </heading>Wardhaugh (1998) writes that  "When a change of topic requires a change in the language used we have metaphorical code-switching" also, that "the choice of code adds a distinct flavour to what is said about the topic. The choice encodes certain social values". This would suggest that in situations of metaphorical code-switching the fact that someone is code-switching at all is often more important than what is being said. Holmes (2001) writes that in metaphorical code-switching "Each of the codes represents a set of social meanings, and the speaker draws on the associations of each". What the speaker is doing when code-switching in this way is encoding information about themselves and their attitudes as if to say 'I belong to group x and believe y' simply by the code they choose to use. Wardhaugh (1998) introduces the 'us-they' distinction in Diglossic situations writing "One language expresses a we-type solidarity among participants, and is therefore deemed suitable for in-group and informal activities, whereas the other language is they-oriented and is considered appropriate to out-group and more formal relationships, particularly of an impersonal kind". Holmes introduces an interesting concept that can be classed under metaphorical switching, which is tag switches. She suggests tag switches are "made primarily for social reasons - to signal the speaker's ethnic identity and solidarity with the addressee". An example of this would be if two bilingual Spanish-English speakers were having a conversation, which was ended by the utterance 'have a good day, Adios!' here, switching to Spanish doesn't add anything to the conversational content, but what it does do is create solidarity between the two members of the group. When used in this way, Holmes says 'Adios' is a "solidarity marker". One final point Holmes makes about 'tag switching' is that it is often used even in situations where the speaker is not bilingual. Holmes states that although few Scottish people speak Gaelic, some will often use Gaelic tags and phrases interspread with their English to identify themselves as part of the Gaelic social group. When code-switching occurs within a conversation, there is often more going on than a signal of social identity. Gal (1979) explains that in Oberwart, code-switching is often used within a conversation to make the connotations of a language affect the direction the conversation takes. She gives examples of German in a Hungarian conversation being used as a "topper - a last word that was not be outdone" and noted that  "Even though it added nothing more to the content of the argument, the German showed more anger, as if something had been yelled louder the second time". This is a good example of how code-switching within a conversation without changing domain can affect the conversation. Gal is however quick to note  "The point is not that a switch to German is always used to express anger, to indicate the last and most effective increase in show of anger in an escalating disagreement, or to win an argument. It is not. The point is, rather that if a speaker wants to, switching to German at a particular point in an argument can accomplish these communicative purposes". Mesthrie (2000) points out how other researches have "Distinguished between 'unmarked' language choices, in which the language used is one that would be expected in that context, and 'marked' choices, in which the language used would not normally be expected. Marked choices may function as attempts to redefine aspects of the context, or the relationship between speakers". Mesthrie also states that "Myers-Scotten has developed this idea into what she terms a markedness model of conversation code-switching". The four code-switching patterns identified are briefly outlined below. <heading>4.21 code-switching as unmarked choices between different languages</heading>Mesthrie (2000) writes that "code-switching may be associated with a series of unmarked choices when aspects of the context such as a change in topic or in the person addressed make a different language variety more appropriate". An example of this would be if two strangers meeting in London began their conversation in English, but upon learning they were both Portuguese changed language to Portuguese. This could be used to create the solidarity relationship of 'Portuguese compatriots' rather than the relationship of strangers. <heading>4.22 code-switching as an unmarked choice</heading>Mesthrie (2000) writes that "code-switching itself may also be an unmarked choice. In this case no meaning need be attached to any particular switch: it is the use of both languages together that is meaningful, drawing on the associations of both languages and indexing dual identities". An example of this is that in Oberwart people may code-switch between standard German and Hungarian, using the German to suggest that they are Intelligent and successful and then using the local Hungarian dialect to suggest that they are trustworthy and honest by emphasising their local identity. <heading>4.23 code-switching as a marked choice</heading>Mesthrie (2000) writes that "In contrast to code-switching as an unmarked choice, code-switching is marked when it does not conform to expected patterns" and furthermore "Marked switching may be used to increase social distance or to express authority or anger". This can clearly been seen in the use of German as a 'topper'. Here, German is a marked choice as the rest of the conversation has been conducted in Hungarian which is the unmarked choice as it is the language expected within that domain. <heading>4.24 code-switching as an exploratory choice</heading>Mesthrie (2000) writes that "code-switching may have an exploratory function when the unmarked choice is uncertain - for instance, when little is known about an interlocutor's social identity, or when there is a 'clash of norms'". An example of this type of code-switching would be in situations where two people are unaware what code to use in conversation and may end up alternating between codes in an attempt to find a suitable one. <heading>Conclusion</heading>In this essay, I first introduced and defined code switching. I then introduced the concept of 'domains' and showed how a switch of domain is nearly always accompanied by a switch of code before outlining some reasons why this happens. I then investigated Diglossic situations, concentrating on what motivates people to change code in bi-lingual situations and relating it to language choice and code-switching. I finally looked at specific types of code-switching and why people select certain codes for certain situations as well as the various reasons that people switch between codes within a single situation or 'domain'. From the evidence given, it is reasonable to conclude that not only code-switching, but any form of language choice in general gives speakers the ability to influence how other people view them. This is particularly true in code-switching where I have shown that by changing codes, speakers can draw on the identities associated with more than one ethnic group. In Diglossic situations this can be membership of two ethnic groups or often, speakers will attempt to associate themselves with the connotations of a certain language. Mesthrie (2000) agrees with this writing "Language choice has to do with maintaining or negotiating social identities in relation to others. Code-switching allows simultaneous access to both identities". This statement also supports my second conclusion, which is that when changing codes it is often the fact that there is a change of code at all which is more important in telling us the meaning of what is being said rather than the actual words themselves. What these conclusions show is that although I have identified many reasons why speakers code-switch the fact that it happens at all demonstrate that there is far more to language than just speech. What speakers do while code-switching is showing us that whether they are aware of it or not they are using code-switching as a communicative device in its own right in a way that can often tell us just as much, or even more about their feelings and intents than the utterances they use. 