<heading>1. Introduction</heading>In the multitude of semantic relations that can exist between words, the phenomena of polysemy and homonymy are not the only ones with overlapping boundaries and fuzzy edges. But to assign a case of "one word, more than one meaning" to one of those categories often seems more difficult than to determine cases of synonymy, oppositeness or hyponymy, for example. This is even more unfortunate given that this particular difference is so important for every lexicographer, as they have to decide whether to file the different meanings associated with one particular word as one entry or separate entries. This paper takes a look at possible approaches to distinguish cases of homonymy from cases of polysemy and aims to evaluate them according to their effectiveness and coherence. In order to provide the foundation to this discussion in section 4, section 2 to will briefly outline the concept of homonymy and section 3 the concept of polysemy. <heading>2. What is homonymy? </heading>Homonyms are different words of the same language that accidentally happen to have the same form, but whose meanings are not related to each other, like mail1 and mail2 (Palmer 1981:101). The dictionary (Concise English Oxford Dictionary 2002) defines mail1 as "letters and parcels sent by post", and it defines mail2 first as "armour made of metal rings or plates joined together flexibly" and secondly as "the protective shell or scales of certain animals". Mail gets two separate dictionary entries because it is a case of homonymy. To determine whether it is a case of absolute or partial homonymy, the words in question must fulfil the following three conditions: <list>Their forms will be unrelated in meaning.All their forms will be identical.All identical forms will be grammatically equivalent.</list>(Lyons 1995:55) In the case of mail, condition 1 is fulfilled as the meaning of mail1 and mail2 do not seem to be related in any way. Condition 2 seems to be satisfied as well because both mail1 and mail2 are mass nouns and therefore have no plural forms that might otherwise display difference. They also fulfil condition 3, as they can appear in the same syntactical environment, e.g. as a Direct Object, as the head of a noun group:  FORMULA   FORMULA  Therefore the sense relationship between mail1 and mail2 is one of absolute homonymy. Partial homonymy is evident in the relationship between fast1 and fast2. In the first of the two entries, the dictionary (Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2002) lists a number of meanings, among them "moving or capable of moving at high speed". The entry for fast2 says "abstain from food or drink, especially as a religious observance". Both meanings are clearly not related, so condition 1 is satisfied. To check whether condition 2 is satisfied as well, it is helpful to list the forms that both lexemes can take:  fast1: fast, faster, fastest  fast2: fast, fasts, fasted The above list shows that condition 2 is not fulfilled. In this case, this is due to the difference in grammatical properties. The fact that fast1 refers to an adjective and fast2 to a verb guarantees their syntactical inexchangeability, therefore condition 3 remains unfulfilled as well. As one of the three conditions is not satisfied, fast1 and fast2 count as a case of partial homonymy rather than absolute homonymy. Within the concept of homonymy, there are two special types that can occur: homography and homophony. In cases of homography, the shape that both lexemes share is graphical, whilst it is phonological in the case of homophony (Goddard 1998:18). Homographs are pronounced differently although their spelling is the same, like live1 as in the infinitive verb to live, and live2 as in live music, whereas homophones are pronounced the same but spelled differently, like  none and nun. <heading>3. What is polysemy? </heading>Words that display a relationship of polysemy agree in form but disagree in meaning, too. But in contrast to cases of homonymy, the distinct meanings of polysemous lexemes are closely related (Hurford and Heasley 1983:123). Without a detailed analysis of back1 and back2 for example, an obvious link between the two meanings emerges quickly. According to the dictionary, which conventionally groups both and several other related meanings in one entry, (Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2002), back1 refers to "the rear surface of the human body from the shoulders to the hips", and back2 to "the side or part of something away from the spectator or from the direction in which it moves or faces". The meaning of back2 seems to be based on the meaning of back1; they are connected by the means of metaphor (Lyons 1995:59). The relationship between the two represents an extension, a transference of meaning from one domain to the other, in this case from the human body, a typical source domain, to a wider context, so that the basic sense could possibly be applied to every physical entity in the world. To a smaller extent, this existence of secondary, transferred meanings, i.e. polysemy, is the case with a lot, if not most lexemes (Goddard 1998:19). But Goddard also points out that in addition to being closely related, the meanings of polysemous words also have to be clearly distinct. When a single, general sense can be applied in different contexts, like the adjective wrong, which can mean "untrue" or "immoral" depending on the speech situation, it is is not a case of polysemy but of 'generality' (Goddard 1998:19). <heading>4. Approaches to drawing a distinction</heading>Homonymy and polysemy, as outlined in section 2 and 3, are two distinct categories. However, in some cases the categorisation is not as salient as in the examples above. When deciding whether two identical lexemes with different meanings should be classified as homonymy or polysemy, a number of criteria are often of help. The most common ones are etymology and "relatedness of meaning" (Lyons 1995: 58). The etymological criterion says that if both lexemes have the same historical origin, they should be treated as a case of polysemy rather than homonymy (Palmer 1981:102). Therefore they should be listed under the same entry in a dictionary, like fellow1 and fellow2. In the Concise Oxford English Dictionary (2002), a number of potential meanings of fellow are recorded, all of them in polysemous relation to each other. Among them are "a person in the same position or otherwise associated with another" (fellow1) and "a member of a learned society" (fellow2). Their common historical origin is Old English fēolaga, which literally means "one who lays down money in a joint enterprise", e.g. "a colleague", derived from Old Norse félagi, which is based on Old Norse fé, meaning "property, money". In this case, a common historic origin between fellow1 and fellow2 could have been established even without etymological analysis, based on knowledge about 17 th/18 th century European coffeehouse culture and the link between capital and science at that time, practised in exclusive societies of wealthy men. But this kind of lay assumptions can lead to wrong conclusions about the etymology of lexemes. This "popular etymology" (Lyons 1995:59) can sometimes hamper the native speaker's intuition about whether two words are related in a polysemic or homonymous way. In most cases however, the native speaker's judgement is proven right by etymology (Lyons 1995:59). Palmer mentions a number of examples of misleading history (Palmer 1981:102). One would imagine, for example, that meal1, "any of the regular daily occasions when food is eaten", and meal2, "the edible part of any grain or pulse ground to powder", are historically related, given the fact that in most parts of the world, cereals have been a main part of the human diet for millennia. Yet, according to etymology, the two lexemes have different origins. Both originate from Old English, but meal1 goes back to mael, of Germanic origin, and meal2 to melu, or meolo, also of Germanic origin (Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2002). Thus they are listed as two separate entries. Pupil1, "a person who is taught by another, especially a school child", and pupil2, "the dark circular opening in the centre of the iris of the eye", are given separate entries as well, thus indicating that their relationship is homonymous. However, Palmer lists them as an example of unexpected shared etymology, i.e. polysemy (Palmer 1981:102). A look at the origin of both entries exposes the difficulty of this categorisation: Both lexemes have developed from Old French pupille, from Latin pupillus (boy) and pupilla (girl). But in the development of the meaning of pupil2, pupilla acted as a diminishing form for pupa (doll), in reference to the "tiny reflected images visible in the eye" (Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2002). It seems likely that pupilla (girl) and pupa (doll) share a common origin as well, and thus should be treated as polysemy, but as some questions like this might be impregnable due to a lack of data, the imperfection of the etymological criterion becomes obvious. The question of the connection between pupilla and pupa might also be related to the other dominant perspective on the difference between homonymy and polysemy: metaphor. As mentioned above, the relatedness between the two lexemes, i.e. their semantic similarity is an important factor in distinguishing homonymy from polysemy. In section 3, metaphorical extension was outlined as a major indicator of polysemous relationships. However, when the semantic criterion calls for closely related meaning in order to establish a case of polysemy, it has to be noted that semantic relatedness is a continuum rather than a binary parameter. This poses a difficulty to determining whether two words are closely related or not. Goddard exemplifies this problem through skip1, as in "they were skipping down the street" and skip2, as in "he skipped a few pages" (Goddard 1998:19). It seems a matter of personal judgement whether the fact that both actions involve a notion of 'forwarding in leaps' justifies their categorisation as polysemy. Exactly how closely related two lexemes must be to qualify for the label 'polysemy' is indefinable. Thus the semantic criterion is restricted in terms of its applicability as well. Palmer suggests a third way of differentiating between polysemy and homonymy: the identification of a central, or core meaning as an indication for polysemy (Palmer 1981:105). But this strategy, so he argues, can only be fruitful if the type of relatedness is of a metaphorical nature. In cases like skip, it might be arguable whether one meaning is more basic than the other, and thus if a core meaning that takes precedence over the other senses can be established at all. <heading>5. Conclusion</heading>After examining the major approaches to the question at the beginning of this essay, "Can homonymy and polysemy be distinguished?", a clear answer seems impossible. The etymological criterion provides a sufficient tool to differentiate between the two in a lot of cases, but unfortunately not in all cases, because history does not always reflect current use accurately. The semantic criterion, which puts history aside and basically asks if the meanings are related, is not without flaws either. This is due to the nature of the concept of relatedness, which is, as most semantic categorisations, a matter of degree rather than of binary opposites. These two criteria are the best that have been found so far. Neither the search for core meaning nor any other tests have a similar success rate. However, the etymological and the semantic criterion do not account for enough cases of "one word, more than one meaning" as to be considered effective means of theoretical distinction. Thus the distinction that lexicographers have to make when deciding on how many meanings they record within one dictionary entry depends, in some cases, not only on etymology and metaphor, but also on their intuition. In the end, the general distinction between homonymy and polysemy must be made from a practical point of view, as theory repeatedly proves to be inadequate. 