<heading>1. Introduction </heading>Language play, the apparently purposeless use of language in a playful manner, has until recently been sidelined in linguistic studies. But David Crystal in 1998 and Guy Cook in 2000 demonstrated how pervasive this use of language is, among children and adults, and cross-culturally. Cook points to the importance of language play in the development and exercise of social and cultural skills, and has developed a list of criteria that help to define a genre as a form of language play. This essay will analyse an adult genre of playful language use, the limerick, in relation to Cook's definition guidelines. In Crystal's view, limericks are "a perfect example of the way sounds and spellings interact in language play" (Crystal 1998: 45), but they contain many more linguistic, semantic and pragmatic characteristics worth of a closer investigation. The following description and analysis will show that limericks work on different, often opposite levels in order to achieve the desired effects. <heading>2. Defining the genre: limericks </heading><heading>History</heading>The limerick's history has to be kept rather brief due to the time and space limits in this essay. However, the developing social context of the genre plays a significant role in understanding why limericks are a form of language play, and thus it needs to be examined to some extent. Historical accounts vary greatly in their claims as to where and when the first limericks were produced, and why this particular metre and rhyming pattern became known as 'limerick'. These discrepancies are not only due to its oral tradition, which hampers provability of origin, but also to its similarity to other simple verse forms. As Cook (2000: 20) points out, there seems to be a cross-cultural and thus possibly innate preference for a verse pattern of four lines with a 4/4 stress. Although the limerick form does not follow this pattern exactly, it might explain why it is so difficult to separate the limerick from a variety of similar prose traditions in different countries and different times. Some scholars claim that Greek comedies of 400 BC contain choruses that resemble the limerick format (Parrott 1983: 10), other's point to Stephano's song in Shakespeare's "The Tempest" (Parrott 1983: 10) or "Othello", dated at 1604 (Baring-Gould 1968:26-27): <quote> And let the canikin clink, clink; And let the canikin clink. A soldier's man; O man's life's but a span; Why then let a soldier drink. (Othello, Act II, Scene 3, Lines 68-72) </quote>Baring-Gould (1968: 26-28) lists another few examples from the 17 th century, which do not follow the classical limerick rhyme and metre pattern exactly. However, they show the emergence of familiar features, such as the choice of a name as the last word of the first line and a self-contained narrative plot, containing moral offences like violence and gambling, and a punch line stating a result: <quote> Good morrow, neighbour Gamble, Come let you and I go ramble: Last night I was shot Through the braines with a pot And now my stomach does wamble... (from "Roxburghe Ballads", 1640, in Baring-Gould 1968: 28)</quote>Baring-Gould also mentions a theory championed by Herbert Langford Reed (in Baring Gould 1968: 29-33), which argues for France as the birthplace of the limerick format. According to this theory, verses like the following were originally sung rather than recited, in a group context, with each member singing a limerick, followed by a chorus chanted by the entire group: <quote> On s'étonne ici que Caliste Ait pris l'habit de Moliniste Puisque cette jeune beauté Ote à chacun sa liberté N'est-ce pas une Janseniste? (from "Ménagiana", 1715, in Baring-Gould 1968: 30)</quote>Interestingly, this French 'limerick' is also concerned with improper behaviour, albeit of a milder degree and in a political context: a young lady appears at a masquerade dressed as a conservative although she is actually a liberal. According to this history of origin, the French tradition was transported to Ireland via homecoming soldiers of the Irish Brigade, which had served with the French for about a century after Louis XIV had taken them with him when he left Ireland in 1691. The homecoming Irish soldiers then imported the sociable French tradition of singing limericks in turns, with the audience joining in the chorus. Legend has it that the 4-line chorus they sang at that time celebrated their arrival home and gave rise to the name of the genre: <quote> Won't you come up, come up, Won't you come up, I say, Won't you come up, come all the way up, Come all the way up to Limerick?</quote>According to Parrott (1983: 11), this Irish tradition then developed parallely to the British tradition, with both verse forms being prosodically identical by accident. When these verses became increasingly popular in the 19 th century, both traditions were merged under the Irish label 'limerick'. In 1820 and 1822, unknown authors compiled well-known collections of limerick-style rhymes, "The History of Sixteen Wonderful Old Women" and "Anecdotes and Adventures of Fifteen Gentlemen". Decades later, lines and characters from both compilations found their way into the work of Edward Lear (Parrott 1983: 9), who is often heralded as the 'father' of limerick poetry. His "Book of Nonsense" (1846) and "The Book of Nonsense and More Nonsense" (1862) certainly gave limericks more prestige and a wider audience, and in 1898, 'limerick' found entry into the Oxford English Dictionary (Baring-Gould 1968: 33). Many amateur poets, but also famous authors like Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Robert Louis Stevenson and George Bernard Shaw (Baring-Gould 1968: 62, 59, 57) exercised their linguistic and literary wit by creating humorous effect within the restrictions of the well-known rhyme and stress pattern. The satirical magazine "The Punch" occasionally used a limerick to satirise political life or public figures (Parrott 1983: 12), as in 1832 when Henry Lord Brougham and Vaux, Lord Chancellor of England carried through the Reform Bill (Baring-Gould 1968: 48): <quote> There was an old broom of St. Stephen's, That set all at sixes and sevens; And to sweep from the room The convictions of Brougham, Was the work of this Broom of St. Stephen's. </quote>In 1863, "The Punch" also launched a series dedicated to producing a limerick for every place name in England (Baring-Gould 1968: 48), which probably mirrored and perpetuated the limerick tendency to use geographical terms, real or fictitious. At the beginning of the 20 th century, the magazine increasingly featured limericks that bend the relation between orthography and pronunciation (Baring-Gould 1968: 49): <quote> There was a young chappie named Cholmondeley, Who always at dinner sat dolmondesly; His fair partner said, As he crumbled the bread, "Dear me! you behave very rolmondeley!"</quote>At that time, the limerick craze was at its height. In 1907-1906, "London Opinion" held extremely successful limerick competitions, which asked the audience to compose the fifth line of a limerick that had had been published up to the forth line in the magazine. There were great prizes and a large number of competitors (Crystal 1998: 45-46). These published limericks were mostly of the 'clean' branch, which Parrott (1983:12) distinguishes from the 'indecent' branch containing very vulgar vocabulary. The latter were circulated orally in private circles. The following decades, when limericks continued to be published in magazines, monographs and collections, saw the emergence of a third branch (Parrott 1983: 15), the 'intellectual stream', concerned with philosophy, science or art, which also manifested itself in limerick competitions in the "New Statesman", "Spectator", "Church Times", "Punch" and many others. Teachers and priests employed the format to make their messages more appealing: <quote>Tis a favorite project of mine A new value of pi to assign. I would fix it at 3 For it's simpler, you see, Than 3 point 1 4 1 5 9. (Harvey L. Carter, Professor of history at Colorado College; in Baring-Gould 1968: 5)</quote><quote> These rhymes were designed by a priest, To affect your religion like yeast; If they help it to grow, Like the yeast in the dough, There'll be one better Christian, at least. (from "Limerick Prayer Book" by G.L.P., in Baring-Gould 1968: 9)</quote>The relaxation of censorship in the 1960s (Parrott 1983: 15) allowed for a better documentation of 'indecent' limericks, and although the limerick is not as popular as it used to be, there are today numerous internet sites dedicated to the collection and celebration of this particular genre, decent and indecent. <heading>2.2 Content and Form</heading>As mentioned in the last section, there are different branches of limericks according to their level of vulgarity and, to a lesser extent, their topics. It is fiercely debated whether only rude limericks can count as 'real' limericks, a controversy that is picked up by the following anonymous verse (Baring-Gould 1968: 9): <quote> The limerick packs laughs anatomical Into space that is quite economical. But the good ones I've seen So seldom are clean And the clean ones so seldom are comical.</quote>Whatever opinion one has on the topic, few would argue that the archetypical limerick is 'offensive' in some way, attaching 'indecent' or at least 'non-standard' qualities, habits or utterances to the people at the centre of its miniature narrative, often related to sexuality. And however various the contents may be, the limerick's form is quite fixed. Tigges (1987: 118) even compares the limerick to the sonnet in terms of structural rigidity. It has five lines forming a AABBA rhyme scheme. Lines 1, 2 and 3 have three feet each, generally anapaestic, while lines 3 and 4 mostly have iambic stress. In a standard limerick structure, each of the five lines has a particular function in the development of the plot, as can be demonstrated by means of the following example (stressed syllables are indicated through underlining): <quote> There was a young woman from Aenos Who came to our party as Venus. We told her how rude 'Twas to come there quite nude, And we brought her a leaf from the green-h'us. (Thomas Bailey Aldrich, in Baring-Gould 1968: 54)</quote>The first line traditionally introduces the main character (a young woman from Aenos), often beginning with "There was" and ending with an unusual rhyming word, mostly exotic place names. The second line introduces a second character ([us]) and possibly an unusual, often contentious or 'indecent' attribute to the main character (nudity). The third and forth line develop the plot and build up suspense, often through a reaction of the second character to the unusual attribute of the main character. The last line is the humorous climax and should contain a witty turn and possibly resolution to the build-up encounter. However, there are probably more exceptions to these tendencies than perfect examples. But most limericks display at least one or two of these features. <heading>3. The limerick as a form of language play </heading>That limericks make playful use of language is obvious to everyone who has ever heard such a verse. However, the following section will systematically establish whether the limerick is a form of language play according to Cook's list of "features of language play" (Cook 2000: 123): <list><heading>Linguistic form </heading>(L1) patterning of forms (rhythms, phonological, and grammatical parallels)(L2) emphasis on exact wording(L3) repetition (both of parts and of whole texts)</list><list><heading>Semantics</heading>(S1) indeterminate meaning (foreign or archaic language, unknown or obscure words, ambiguities)(S2) vital or important subject-matter (birth, death, sexual relations, health, etc.)(S3) reference to an alternative reality(S4) inversion of language/reality relation</list><list><heading>Pragmatics</heading>(P1) focus upon performance and upon the speaker and/or writer(P2) use in congregation and/or intimate interaction(P3) creation of solidarity and/or antagonism ad competition(P4) no direct usefulness(P5) preservation or inversion of the social order(P6) enjoyment and/or value</list>As Cook points out, not every feature of the above is evident in every form of language play. But as the following analysis will show, the limerick contains almost each of Cook's features. <heading>3.1 Linguistic form</heading>The language in limericks is patterned in various ways. A limerick is subdivided in a set amount of lines, subject to a rigid, pervasive rhyme structure and a fairly strict metric schema. Thus feature L1, i.e. rhythmic and phonological patterning applies. Grammatical and even lexical patterning is evident within a single limerick, e.g. through the occasional exact or partial repetition (L3) of the first line in line 5, especially in Lear's verses: <quote> There was a Young Lady from Norway Who casually sat in a doorway; When the door squeezed her flat, She exclaimed, "What of that?" This courageous Young Lady of Norway. (from "A Book of Nonsense" by Edward Lear, in Baring-Gould 1968: 43)</quote>In addition to these linguistic parallelisms within one token, there are also the parallelisms between different tokens of the same type, i.e. the limerick genre. The speakers' and hearers' awareness of the typical linguistic features of a limerick 'pre-patterns' the language in their minds, thus they are able to recognise another token of the genre quickly and perceive and process the limerick's language in comparison to other limericks they know. Therefore the limerick's linguistic patterning works on an intra- and intertextual level. Limericks also display a unique interaction of phonological and orthographical patterns, which works in both directions. Often the spelling of the last word in lines 2, 3, 4 and/or 5 is adjusted to match the spelling of the unusual rhyme word in line 1, like in the "Cholmondeley" limerick on page 5 or in the following example: <quote> There was a Young Lady named Psyche, Who was heard to ejaculate, 'Pcryche!' For, when riding her pbych, She ran over a ptych, And fell on some rails that were pspyche. (in Crystal 1998: 47)</quote>Other limericks make use of an eye/vision rhyme (Beard 1995: 36), where an orthographic similarity creates an illusion of phonological similarity: <quote> I once met a man from the South Whose manner was somewhat uncouth; He'd constantly swear, Driving decent folk spare 'Til some soap was applied to his mouth. ( URL  h2g2/A218206)</quote>This play with the relation between orthography and pronunciation is of course only possible because of the peculiar English spelling system, and caused much enjoyment among "Punch" readers in the early 20 th century, as explained in section 2.1. All in all, the limerick shows manifold features of linguistic patterning: rhythmic, phonological, grammatical, lexical and even orthographical. <heading>3.2 Semantics</heading>Feature S1, the presence of indeterminate meaning, is given in limericks through their preference for foreign or even fictional locations, unusual names and ambiguous lexis. The limerick's main characters come from Norway or Aenos, are called Cholmondeley or Psyche, and often the same character features in several poems: <quote> There was a young lady of Norway Who hung by her toes in a doorway. She said to her beau: "Just look at me, Joe, I think I discovered one more way." (in Baring-Gould 1968: 87)</quote>The above limerick suggests a sexual content, but not through overt presence of vulgar vocabulary, but through the indeterminate meaning of "one more way". It also exemplifies the most common topic of limerick: sexuality, which is one of the "important subject matters" demanded by feature S2. To what extent there is a 'deeper' meaning to the typical subjects of the limerick is hard to determine. Freud's release theory (1905, in Cook 2000: 73), which says that humour is a psychological mechanism that releases subconscious desires into consciousness, might explain why there is such a tendency to thematise taboo subjects in limericks. However, limericks are not strongly subversive in terms of their influence on political, cultural or social thinking, as will be briefly discussed in section 3.3. They can hardly count as protest literature. Bouissac (1977: 3) suggests that when the limerick is thematising sexuality, this is actually a translation of dietary codes into sexual codes. Many limericks, in his view (1977: 2), act as a subconscious meta-discourse to negotiate cultural codes concerned with food and their preparation. According to his theory, the following limerick is, on a semiotic level, concerned with the cultural problems resulting from the introduction of tinned food as a substitute for fresh food: <quote> There was an old spinster named Gretel Who wore underclothes made of metal When they said, "does is hurt?" She said, "It keeps dirt From stamen and pistil and petal." (from Bouissac 1977: 3)</quote>Unfortunately, the time constraints on this essay do not allow further discussion of Bouissac's theory. However, the concept of translating a taboo topic (dietary codes) into a stronger taboo topic (sexual codes) seems slightly far-fetched and futile. It seems more likely that the challenge to sexual morale codes posed by rude limericks has no 'deeper' meaning other than the pragmatic purposes that will be discussed in section 3. Feature S3, the reference to an alternative reality, is given by the surreal and bizarre characters, locations and plots. However, unlike some children's chants, which sometimes vocalise a string of unrelated images (Cook 2000: 1), limericks are not overall nonsense because they are visualisable as a coherent narrative within a reality they create themselves, rather than the real world. <heading>3.3 Pragmatics</heading>In the original limerick performance tradition as outlined in section 2.1, the focus is very much on the speaker and his performance (P1), cheered on by the audience in a pub or at parties. But even in the late 19 th, the 20 th century and today, limericks are produced to display the linguistic wit and humorous proficiency of the speaker/writer. But apart from this focus on the speaker/writer, limerick culture also has a strong interactive tradition, which accounts for feature P2. 'Mild' limericks may be shared within a big congregation, whereas very rude once are likely to be shared in smaller groups. But independent of the channel through which the limerick reaches its audience, it also has various internal means to create social inclusion and exclusion. On the one hand there is the solidarity created through the shared knowledge of the limerick's linguistic features and typical content composition, and especially through the shared enjoyment of its humorous effects, given that communal laughter is one of the major interpersonal binders of human culture. On the other hand the limerick creates a feeling of inclusion or exclusion through its degree of vulgarity. Don Marquis (1878-1937), an American newspaper columnist and humorist said once of the limerick: "There are three kinds of limerick: Those suitable for recount in the presence of ladies, those utterable in the absence of ladies but the presence of clergy, and limericks." ( URL  h2g2/A218206) This statement epitomises how the limerick excludes more people, or groups of people, the ruder they are. The disgust of one listener may lead to his or her exclusion from the communicative event, but it may bind those intimately together who revel in the sensation of 'off-limit' topics. Thus the limerick has potential for creating solidarity as well as antagonism (P4), especially through taboo subjects like violence, excrement and all sorts of taboo sexuality like rape, incest, sodomy, prostitution and masturbation, that have no place in other poetic forms or social discourses: <quote> There was a young girl of Aberystwyth Who took grain to the mill to get grist with. The miller's son, Jack, Laid her flat on the back And united the organs they pissed with. (A.C. Swinburne, in Baring-Gould 1968: 86)</quote><quote>There was an old man of Dundee Who molested an ape on a tree: The result was most horrid, All arse and no forehead, Three balls and a purple goatee. (in Baring-Gould 1968: 87)</quote>A sense of competition, mentioned in feature (P3), is also an important component of limerick culture. As outlined before, the group recitals and chants of the early days served as a showcase for soloists with poetic wit and the courage to proclaim rude words, who were taking turns and each trying to contribute the funniest, cleverest verse. The limerick competitions in 20 th century magazines institutionalised this poetic competition. And today, internet-sites provide another communicative medium for display and exchange of self-written verses amongst likeminded individuals, who are bound together by their hobby but still in competition for the funniest selection. Therefore, limericks would certainly fall in Callois' play category 'agôn' (Callois [1959] 1969, in Cook 2000: 114), building on Huizinga's concept of play as a manifestation of humanity's innate drive to compete against each other (Huizinga [1944] 1949, in Cook 2000: 110). However, limericks might also count as an instance of 'illinx', as will be shown shortly. Cook's feature P4, "no direct usefulness", certainly applies to limericks as well. They do not have any practical communicative purpose like the sharing of information, requesting something, or an affective message. Limericks also contain feature P5. Their ridicule of authorities like the church, the state or specific public figures (as in the "Broom of St. Stephens" limerick, page 5) does not exactly call for an inversion of the social order, but their 'indecent' content poses a challenge to moral and social norms. However, while the vocabulary and contents may be subversive in terms of morality, the way most limericks enforce stereotypical conceptions of the power balance in the sexual relationship between men and women is hardly revolutionary: <quote>While Titian was mixing rose madder His model reclined on a ladder; Her position to Titian Suggested coition, So he leapt up the ladder and had'er. (in Baring-Gould 1968: 12-13)</quote>Both enjoyment and value are undoubtedly attached to the limerick. The value assigned to it is manifest in the many collections and commentaries that have been dedicated to it. The joy arises not only from the humorous content, but also, in case of 'limerick insiders' from the recognition of pre-conceived patterns of limerick structure. According to Incongruity Theory (Cook 2000: 74), humorous joy also arises from the opposite, namely the contradiction of expectations. The limerick contradicts mental schemata relating to real life experience whilst satisfying expectations related to the genre's well-known patterns of metric and phonological structure as well as plot development and vocabulary. It is a vehicle that violates real life norms, and at the same time it is subject to very rigid expectations concerning the way it which it works its violations. Therefore, it can trigger joy over the fulfilment of expectations and the contradiction of expectations alike. This demonstrates how the limerick, as a typical example of language play, works in opposite dimensions (Cook 2005). In addition, limericks give rise to joy over physical achievement, i.e. the articulatory challenge of pronouncing correctly all the tongue-twisters and foreign words, the words whose orthography had been bent in order to match them, and to do all this whilst maintaining the swinging rhythm of the metric pattern. Although Callois does not list any verbal activity in his 'illinx' category (Callois [1959] 1969, in Cook 2000: 115), it seems reasonable to group limericks into this category, because the mastery of articulatory exercises depends on physical control too, and can cause a similar 'high' or 'giddiness' experienced through the mastery of dances, for example. <heading>4. Conclusion </heading>The preceding descriptive and analytical sections have established that the limerick is a formidable example of language play in Cook's sense. They display various formal linguistic, semantic and pragmatic features of language play, amongst them the most important, i.e. the patterning of language form, the creation of alternative realities and the inclusion/exclusion of people from a group (Cook 2005). Compared to some children's rhymes or graffiti, the limerick might be regarded as a rather more refined and complex genre of playful language use. It has a high level of intertextuality, a very rigid formal structure and is practised by adults, often literary professionals. However, it serves similar cultural purposes, i.e. the exercise and display of linguistic proficiency, an essential skill in human societies. Whether or not its semiotics go beyond a superficial challenge of moral norms is an interesting question, but one that would call for a separate piece of work. 