<quote>"There can surely be nobody so petty and apathetic in his outlook that he has no desire to discover by what means and under what system of government the Romans succeeded in less than fifty-three years in bringing under their rule almost the whole of the inhabited world, an achievement which is without parallel in human history."</quote><fnote>Polybius The Rise of the Roman Empire, 1.1 </fnote>Polybius dates Rome's expansion from the beginning of the Second Punic War in 220 BC to 167 BC, however; broadly speaking one can date the city of Rome's transformation from a single city state into an entire empire stretching from North Africa and Western Europe to the Hellenistic kingdoms and Asia Minor from around 264 to 133 BC. This period is widely acknowledged as being the time of Roman conquest and expansion. The motives behind this rapid expansion have been eagerly debated from the time of the actual events and continue to be debated today by modern scholars who are still undecided as to whether Rome's empire was acquired by chance or by a series of aggressive premeditated actions against neighbouring peoples that come under the general heading of "aggressive imperialism". <fnote>E. Betts, per.comm Lecture 11, 9/11/05 </fnote><quote>"From the earliest days, war was at the heart of the life of the Roman people. They fought almost every year. Annual rituals marked the opening and closing of the campaigning season."</quote><fnote>J. Rich & G. Shipley (1993), p1. </fnote>War was a central part of Roman society and was in no way alien to the people of Rome. They expected it and revelled in it. War was an institution of Rome; it was an annual event and a way of life for all. The Romans saw conflicts in a predominantly positive way in comparison to modern attitudes to war. Their fears of possible death were outweighed by the chance that war presented to every Roman man of gaining glory for himself, his family, Rome and the gods, (although one must note that after the Roman defeat at Cannae such confidence may have wavered slightly in the face of such horror). Furthermore, since it was necessary to be reasonably successful in warfare to join the Roman elite, the trend of annual warfare played very much into the hands of the wealthy and ambitious men of the Republic given that success in war brought with it substantial benefits such as political power, prestige and a massive amount of money for those who held or aspired to high ranks in the Roman military or magistracies. <quote>"To become a full member of the aristocracy, it was necessary in Polybius' time to complete ten annual campaigns, and to become an honoured and successful and powerful member of the aristocracy it was also necessary to achieve at least a moderate degree of success as a military leader."</quote><fnote>W.V. Harris (1984) p14. </fnote>Brunt cites Valerius Maximus as saying that if a general excelled himself in battle by killing 5,000 of the enemy it was possible for him to be awarded Rome's ultimate accolade, a triumph. Through the triumph Rome was able to aggressively celebrate its victories by public displays of plunder and processions of distinguished prisoners of war. A triumph would give a Roman commander a considerable amount of auctoritas and respect amongst other senators and a great deal of renown in regard to matters of state and future military campaigns which would stand him in good stead come the time of the senate's elections. <fnote>Brunt, "Laus Imperii" (1978). </fnote>It could also be argued that the incessant warfare during the republic helped to stabilize Rome and its empire by helping Rome maintain control over its conquered provinces who had become its military allies. Constant conflict kept the armies of Roman colonies busy since they would fight side-by-side with the Romans in battle (although they were more often in the front lines since Roman commanders probably valued their own Roman troops more highly than their allied ones) which in the eyes of the senate prevented them from scheming and organising rebellion against Rome. A famous example of this principle can be seen in Polybius' Histories where he discusses Rome's true reasons for going to war with the Dalmations which is a stark contrast to the contemporary belief that the Romans fought them because the ambassador sent by the Dalmations insulted the Romans. <quote>"...they did not at all want the Italians to become effeminate owing to the long peace, it being now 12 years since the war with Perseus and their campaigns in Macedonia. They therefore determined to recreate, as it were, the spirit and zeal of their own troops by undertaking a war against the Dalmations, and by striking terror into the Illyrians to compel them to obey their commands." </quote><fnote>Polybius, "Histories", 32.13.4-9 </fnote>Continuous warfare can also be seen to have provided stability in the city of Rome according to Dionysius of Halicarnassos who describes how consuls saw war as a blessing since it provided an annual income and distracted the people and senate from matters that may have undermined the running of the state: <quote>"Those who assumed the consulship therefore considered the appearance of a new war as an answer to a prayer. They themselves invented pretexts and grievances for war when the enemy were quiet, since they saw that wars made the state great and prosperous, while internal sedition made it humble and weak."</quote><fnote>Dionysius of Halicarnassos "Roman Antiquities" 10.33 </fnote>Scholars such as North and Harris seem to agree that Rome's policy of almost continuous warfare could very well have been simply a result of habit on the senate's part since they had become accustomed to the benefits that such endeavors would nearly always bring. This begs the question of what these benefits in fact were since the most esteemed senators who would be able to sway votes on wars already possessed a more than considerable amount of political power and they most probably would have already gained much glory from fighting in previous wars. Thus it would seem that money played a large part in the senate's decisions regarding conflict seeing that state and its citizens could line their pockets substantially in a variety of ways as a result of war. <fnote>W.V. Harris (ed.), (1984) p20. </fnote>One way in which they enriched themselves was through the indemnity payments that they forced upon their conquered enemies. Indemnity payments from foreign colonies provided a steady and regular income for the state; however it has been questioned whether these payments for defeat were meant to inflict economic damage on the enemy & profit Rome or whether they were simply to assert Rome's dominance over the conquered in a more political way. The indemnities would seem to be more of a warning to other states and a constant reminder to the conquered of their loss to the Romans since most indemnities seem to have been quite small and often had to be paid over long periods of time. <quote>"Carthaginian envoys in 191 proposed to pay off their entire indemnity. Terms of the treaty after the Hannibalic war had obliged them to remit ten thousand talents in a payment schedule that stretched over fifty years. Now, only a decade or so after the agreement, Carthage showed herself ready to discharge her obligation in a single lump sum. The patres, however, rejected the offer with alacrity. They would accept not a coin before the date fell due (Livy 36.4.5-9)...... Continuous, long-term payments emphasized the submission of the former enemy and gave a repeated reminder of her defeat, a lesson to other powers who might be recalcitrant or belligerent. The economic benefit was incidental."</quote><fnote>W.V. Harris (ed.), (1984), p62-63. </fnote>Land also played an important role in the possible economic reasons for Rome's aggressive expansion abroad. The economy had always been based on agriculture and thus land was a valuable commodity to the Romans. Aristocrats could seize fertile land for themselves in conquered colonies and use captured prisoners of war to work the land and the state was always in need of land to settle the army's veterans. Coupled with the desire of the rich to obtain new land and thus make more money there was a great deal of money to be made by means of trading with or through conquered states. Many of the colonies had an abundant supply of resources that could benefit Rome and therefore many of the treaties that Rome made with its colonies left all the land in the hands of their defeated foes in favor of waving harbour dues and thus allowing the Romans to trade more easily. <quote>"One famous senatorial action would seem to support the economic hypothesis. In 187 BC the patres passed a decree awarding Ambracia the privilege of imposing whatever harbour dues she wished - so long as Romans and Latins were exempt from payment."</quote><fnote>E.S. Gruen (1984), p71 </fnote>Furthermore, if this evidence does not seem sufficient to prove that senators were greatly motivated to make war on foreign states so that they might gain from trade there is also the fact that when the Lex Claudia was introduced by the tribune of the plebs there was a massive amount of opposition to it in the senate despite it being passed. This law prohibited senators and their sons from owning any ship that was capable of carrying 300 amphorae or more (which was deemed to be large enough to transport the crops from a senator's fields), as it was seen as unseemly for a senator to make money in such a fashion. <fnote>Livy, History of Rome, 21.63.3-4 </fnote>In addition to the money that could be made from indemnities, land and trade, men could become extremely wealthy through booty acquired in war. Plunder could be spent in whichever way the general who obtained it chose and thus was a powerful tool for the rich. It could be distributed to the armies if the general wished to gain the support of the plebs and keep morale high since it provided a livelihood for the regular plebeian soldier on top of his pay, or it could be given to the state treasury to help solve the debt and land problems that constantly troubled Rome. However, the rich often used the majority of the wealth that they acquired through booty to gain prestige and renown through dedications at shrines and the subsidizing of public games and buildings in their name. These public gestures of "generosity" clearly gave certain individuals a great deal of political power and influence in Rome which led to generals desiring more and more power and wealth and thus they began to dictate their military policy without the senate's permission. Wars fought without the senate's permission would most certainly seem to have been aggressive in nature since the very fact that the senate was not consulted would seem to indicate that the commander either wanted to keep the profits from it for himself or he believed that the senate would not agree to fight it. An example of this is described by Appian who speaks of Lucullus' reasons and actions for attacking the Vaccei: <quote>"Lucullus being greedy of fame and needing money, because he was in straightened circumstances, invaded the territory of the Vaccei (in Spain, 151 BCE), another Celtiberian tribe, neighbours of the Arevaci, although he had no warrant from the Senate, nor had they ever attacked the Romans, or offended Lucullus himself." </quote><fnote>Appian, Spanish Wars, 51 </fnote>This desire for more money and glory coupled with the ingrained Roman belief that they could conquer the entire known world developed into competition and rivalries between the rich for individual power and greatness resulting in military commanders such as Caesar and Pompey amassing a huge amount of personal power and their own considerable empires and ending in the downfall of the Republic in civil war. <fnote>W.V. Harris (ed.) (1984), p22. </fnote>Despite the fact that the majority of wars fought by Rome seem to have originated from the imperialistic desires of the elite it must be stressed that not all the wars that they fought in and won were started by aggressive action. Harris sums this point up best in the general context: <quote>"No doubt the war of 225 against the Gauls, the First Macedonian War and the war against Antiochus III were in substantial part forced on to the Romans, and other wars, started more or less voluntarily, had to be continued up to a point whether they liked it or not. These facts by no means change the fundamental character of mid-republican imperialism."</quote><fnote>W.V. Harris (ed.) (1984), p21 </fnote>Taking into account the evidence discussed in this essay I find it hard to agree with scholars such as Sherwin-White (1984) who cling to the now outdated notion that Rome's empire came about purely through defensive imperialism, that is, that all Roman wars were fought in defense of their borders or of their allies. However I concede that after the Punic Wars when Rome had suffered a heavy defeat at Cannae they may still have feared the figure of Hannibal and therefore may have preemptively attacked foreign powers because they were afraid that another general in the same vain as Hannibal may arise from abroad and hurt Rome again. Nevertheless, I find it hard to hold all of Rome's wars accountable to being afraid a figure that may never have surfaced. The first wars following the defeat of Carthage could be attributed to this however it would not seem correct to believe that all of Rome's wars were defensive considering the benefits that were associated with war and the way in which they embraced these through exploiting the provinces. In my opinion the desire of the elite for money and power drove the Roman war machine and as they continued to be successful in war their society began to foster and celebrate the ideology that their city was the ultimate superpower and that the world was theirs to conquer. <quote>"...since the Romans deliberately chose to school themselves in such great enterprises, it is quite natural that they should not only have boldly embarked upon their pursuit of universal dominion, but that they should actually have achieved their purpose."</quote><fnote>Polybius "The Rise of the Roman Empire" 1.63. </fnote>