Mythology has long been a popular topic for cinema dating back to some of the earliest silent movies such as Edison's "Cupid and Psyche" (1897) and Mélies' "The Sibyl of Cumae" (1898), right through to the 21 st Century, where films like Wolfgang Peterson's "Troy" (2004) adorn our local multiplexes and gross close to $350 million at the worldwide box office. For cinema, mythology provides the audience with pure entertainment whilst simultaneously lining the pockets of the studio heads through box office takings and in many cases merchandising deals that make movies based on mythology very lucrative for a large number of reasons. Mythology in modern film is obviously meant to entertain more than anything else and it does this by transporting its audience into another world, a fantasy world where anything is possible, where the rules of our world do not apply. In these fantasy worlds there is magic, hideous and terrifying monsters, quarrelsome gods, brave heroes, and beautiful heroines that we watch through archetypal stories of good versus evil played out in front of us. In these stories the existence of mythical creatures allows the studios to use an array of special effects to fascinate their audience and in many cases with films such as Don Chaffey's "Jason and the Argonauts" (1963) and Desmond Davies' "Clash of the Titans" (1981) it could be argued that these films were quite simply made as vehicles for the stop-motion animation special effects technology of Ray Harryhausen that was available at the time. When "Jason and the Argonauts" was released in 1963 its audience would have never seen anything like the stop-motion creatures presented and although they may appear out-dated in comparison to the CGI technology of today as shown by Disney's "Hercules" (1997), they still prove to be thoroughly entertaining, as Neil Pettigrew notes, <quote>"The skeleton battle in Jason and the Argonauts (1963) is one of the enduring delights of cinema. Whether you are 6 or 60, the sight of seven sword-wielding skeletons battling with three horror struck Argonauts is guaranteed to have your eyes popping out of your head while transporting your imagination to a world where the impossible does happen."</quote><fnote>"Stop-motion's finest hour" by Neil Pettigrew p1 </fnote>The monsters Harryhausen created for "Jason and the Argonauts" are probably still what the film is best remembered for and at the time of the film's release it was used as the major selling point of the film as shown by some of the posters in the press-book for the British release which exclaim "SEE" before describing each of the Argonauts' encounters with a stop-motion animated monster. Furthermore, if we compare Harryhausen's hydra from "Jason and the Argonauts" to the CGI hydra we see in Disney's "Hercules" we notice that although the hydra in the Disney picture is much more "lifelike" than Harryhausen's hydra due to the smoother edges and added details, the tone of the encounter is quite different. In "Hercules" the emphasis is more on the hero's horror and fear whereas in "Jason and the Argonauts" the scene seems more in tune with the film's adventurous spirit meaning that the differences in technology do not make the scenes any less compelling or entertaining than the other. <fnote>Press-book for British release (see appendix 1) </fnote>Disney's "Hercules" is another example of how a different cinematic medium can be used to present mythological tales. Through animation the film-makers can create anything they desire without being hindered by the laws of physics. In addition, since the whole animation process in itself could be called "special effects", and is capable of showing the audience anything that can be imagined it is an apt medium in which to explore fantastical worlds and beings as expressed by Roy Disney when speaking of animated mythology, <quote>"A story about characters that never existed and really sort of exist in the imagination only and that's what animation does, is tell you stories about things you couldn't see any other way."</quote><fnote>Roy Disney on mythology in cinema from "Greece and Rome on Film 2005: Lecture 9" </fnote>Another element of cinema's obsession with mythological themes is that films based on mythology have a basic series of events and characters already laid down for the film-makers to work from courtesy of the original myth or text that tells the story. However, given the fact that no one single definitive version of any myth exists due to the way that they evolve as they are passed down from generation to generation means that film-makers do not have to worry very much about any problems concerning accuracy or authenticity due to the often vague nature of ancient mythology. As Derek Elley succinctly remarks, <quote>"The Greeks were as confused about their own mythology as the ordinary cinemagoer of today."</quote><fnote>"The Epic Film: Myth and History" by Derek Elley p55 </fnote>The nature of mythology also allows the film-makers to re-interpret or alter certain aspects of the narrative or characters in order to present the myth in a certain fashion depending on the type of film being produced, the period that it is produced in, and the audience that it is primarily aimed at. This obviously makes it much easier for the film-makers to create characters that their audience can identify with because they can simply modernise certain aspects of them such as their morality or they can include modern parallels. For example, the character of Jason (played by Todd Hamilton) in "Jason and the Argonauts" bears very little resemblance to the Jason of Apollonius' "Argonautica" given that he is portrayed nothing like the weak and deceitful man Apollonius illustrates him to be but rather as a strong and courageous leader in the mould of a conventional Hollywood hero who is always morally just and fair. Similarly, Tate Donovan's character Hercules in the Disney adaptation of the myth is a somewhat more modern, Americanised version of the mythological strongman in comparison to the character written about in ancient literature considering that Disney's take on the myth is that "Herc" was a teenage celebrity trying to find his place in the world rather than a man who killed his wife and children in a frenzy. However, Nick Lowe makes the valid point that, <quote>"What, rather, defines Disney's Hercules is its deeper, mythical authenticity; its respect for the meaning invested in the figure of the hero for each culture that retells him. For archaic and classical Greeks, Heracles was the embodiment of the mortal hero at the edge of mortality, the summit of achievement and pain where the mortal condition breaks through to the divine. For Stoics and Romans, he was a culture-hero and mythical model of ideologically-sanctioned behaviour. And for Disney, Herc is the human embodiment of the American hero we all aspire to become, whatever our ethnicity, trading status, or level of disposable income."</quote><fnote>"Mutant Popcorn" originally in "Interzone" by Nick Lowe p3 </fnote>The previously mentioned films were wholly mainstream examples of myth on film and hence they were fairly faithful to the actual myths that they were based on. In contrast to these is a series of Italian films called the "peplum films" which began with the first peplum film of the Hercules myth "Le Fatiche di Ercole" (1957), which was intended to be shown on the "terza visione" circuit. Therefore it would be shown in rural and urban cinemas whilst doing touring shows around the country. This meant that the audience in the movie theatre would not be paying a great deal of attention to the film being shown and in most cases the evening would be a means for socialising more than anything else. Throughout the film people would be coming and going and talking loudly and hence the film needed to grab the attention of its audience at key points in short bursts if possible using striking imagery. For the peplum films this meant creating more of a character than a movie and thus apart from a few of the earliest of the peplum films the majority of them simply featured a mythological hero battling against something evil in an effort to help those weaker than him. Hence we are presented with such classics as Mario Bava's "Hercules vs. the Vampires" (1961) and Giacomo Gentilomo's "Hercules vs. the Moon Men" (1964). The hero shown was always a perfectly formed bodybuilder (usually from the USA) giving the picture an appeal to both sexes, for women it was the lead's body, for men, the lead's body to some extent was supposed to appeal to them as an example of what they could be like if they followed something like the Charles Atlas course but also the female characters who were often scantily clad and always very beautiful. These "B-movie" type films relied on the same formula universally so that the audience could frequently be given a display of the hero's perfectly formed body using various poses which the lead actor (usually an American body builder) would hold for a number of seconds. Richard Dyer explains this trait of the peplum films well when discussing the casting of the American bodybuilder Steve Reeves as Hercules and the way in which for part of the film he plays a secondary role to Jason on his voyage for the golden fleece, <quote>"Such narrational devices permit the set pieces of posing that follow on from casting bodybuilders... the point is their size and shape, frozen in moments of maximum tension. Holding a boulder aloft, in a clinch with a lion, these and many other set-ups incorporate not only the posing vocabulary of bodybuilding competitions but also the mise-en-scenes of such non-narrative forms as physique photography and the strongman acts. The peplum's collage structure showcases the built body."</quote><fnote>"White" by Richard Dyer (1997) p42 (of seminar booklet 1) </fnote>Furthermore, the peplum films (which were originally produced solely for an Italian audience) are a good example of how cinema uses general heroic figures familiar to different cultures to appeal to a certain audience. They used the strong man figure that would have been familiar to the agricultural communities that these films were often shown in when touring the country to create a hero that although based on a mythological demi-god would have had some significance to its modern audience. Likewise, in Jason Don Chaffey gave his audience a heroic explorer whose quest would be for the good of all mankind which an American audience could compare to the heroic explorers of their time that they idolised, their astronauts. Similarly, Disney presented us with a character that had quite literally fallen from grace and was the Rocky-esque American hero who must defeat the mighty villain in the traditional underdog story that has always held a universal popularity for audiences. In conclusion, it would seem that cinema's attraction to mythology lies in their scope for presenting the audience with sheer entertainment using special effects, heroic figures and conflicts in fantasy lands that could only be realised through cinema. In addition, the ability to re-interpret characters and storylines makes the topic of mythology appealing to studios and film-makers who know that there is a lot of money in the cinema of Greek mythology in comparison to Roman or Biblical epics that are associated more with historical authenticity and religious or political messages as summarized by Derek Elley, <quote>"Where the Bible provided opportunities to play on an audience's religious sympathies, and the Roman world opportunities to play on their taste for cruelty and spectacle, Greece provided fantasy, magic and special effects."</quote><fnote>"The Epic Film: Myth and History" by Derek Elley (1984) </fnote>