Although there are many heroes in the Iliad who are rulers and leaders of men, the question of whether both heroism and leadership can co-exist simultaneously is by no means a simple one. Heroism in the epic poems of Homer is not completely the same as the modern ideal of heroism that can be seen in comic book superheroes such as Spiderman and Superman where Christian values such as self-sacrifice, belief in a common good, and forgiveness are paramount. Therefore it would seem intelligent to define what heroism is in Homer's epics and what we should understand by the term leadership before we move into the discussion of whether they are at all compatible in the poem. Heroism in Homer is brilliantly summarized by Edwards when he says: <quote>"Always to be the best, and superior to others. This sums up the heroic code; it was the counsel with which Peleus sent his mighty son Achilles off to fight with the Greeks at Troy." </quote><fnote>Edwards (1987), p150 </fnote>However, the heroic code is not quite that simple, it is not one single thing but a collection of diverse virtues and duties that sometimes conflict with each other. These duties include everything from respecting the gods to fighting bravely in battle and killing the enemy whilst leadership involves making the right decisions for the good of the army and making sure that it functions in the efficient way that it should. <fnote>Redfield (1975), p109 </fnote>A clear example of a co-existence between these two ideals of Homer's epic can be seen through the actions of Patroclus in Book 16 where he heroically decides to lead Achilles' army of Myrmidons into the battle whilst Achilles refuses to fight due to his dishonouring at the hands of Agamemnon. Nestor reminds Patroclus how his father Menoetius told him "...to give sound advice, make suggestions and give him (Achilles) a lead which he will follow to his own advantage", which suggests that Patroclus' purpose in Achilles' forces is not simply to be a good warrior and companion to Achilles but to control him to a certain extent especially when we consider that Patroclus is in fact older than Achilles. Nestor appeals to Patroclus to enter the battle in Achilles' armour to save the Greek armies from defeat since they have been pushed back to their ships and to make the Trojans believe that Achilles has returned to the fighting. Thus Patroclus' motives here are what make his actions an example of both good leadership and heroism. When he speaks to Nestor and when he eventually enters onto the battlefield with the Myrmidons in Book 16 he is doing so primarily to help relieve the strain on the other Greek soldiers rather than to gain personal glory from the fighting. This makes him a good leader and hero because he seeks to win glory for the army before himself and thus will make sure that his men are organised and efficient. <fnote>Homer, Iliad, 11:787-789 </fnote>Patroclus is given an arming scene before he assembles with the troops and enters battle indicating that he is going to be almost unstoppable in the conflict for a certain period of time (the Greeks this called an "aristeia"). This heroic state would most probably nowadays be seen as a type of uncontrollable brutal madness which is anything but heroic but we must remember that at the time Homer was writing his epics, the audience that he would most probably have performed them to would have had a good understanding of war and would have recognised such a physical state. To an extent the hero who experiences an aristeia can also be read as encompassing both of the two virtues of good leadership and heroism at the same time since part of being a leader is setting a good example to the rest of one's troops and to the other soldiers on the battlefield and a major part of heroism is success in battle. When Patroclus enters the fighting he is the first of all the Myrmidons to kill and the first man he kills is the Pyraechmes, the leader of the Paeonians (one of the Trojan contingents), and he eventually goes on to kill one of the most prominent heroes of the Trojans, the Lycian hero Sarpedon. Furthermore, as Patroclus becomes successful in his advance Homer begins to describe other heroes such as Menelaus beginning to kill again as Patroclus leads them away from the ships showing that Patroclus' actions are having a positive effect on the Greeks and that he is leading them well.  <fnote>Homer, Iliad, 16:287-289 </fnote><fnote>Homer, Iliad, 16:311-312 </fnote>Hector shows good leadership and heroism simultaneously by observing and obeying the advice of the Trojan prophet Helenus who tells him to return to the city with Aeneas and to tell the women of Troy to make an offering at the shrine of Athene in an attempt to stop Diomedes' rampage through the Trojan ranks by appeasing the goddess. Hector immediately acts upon this advice and is thus a good hero because he is respecting and obeying the advice of the divine. A more traditional and recognised form of good leadership in the poem is the way in which the heroes interact with their troops; inspecting, organising and encouraging them before battle. There are frequent examples of this type of leadership in the poem such as in book 2 when after having silenced Thersites, Odysseus takes the sceptre to speak to the entire Greek force encouraging them to continue fighting and not to give up and think of returning home. As with Patroclus when he enters the fighting in Achilles' armour, it is Odysseus' motive for encouraging the Greek army that makes this a good example of good leadership being compatible with good heroism. Homer does not tell us that Odysseus gets up in front of the entire army because he wants to gain renown from showing his oratory skills, he tells us that, "... Odysseus had their interests at heart as he rose and addressed them." Achilles also shows us that he can be a good heroic leader when he chooses to be. In book 16 we see him organising and encouraging his men before Patroclus leads them out to battle: <fnote>Homer, Iliad, 2:283 </fnote><quote>"Achilles went the rounds of his huts and got all his Myrmidons under arms... When Achilles had drawn them all up, men with their commanders in their proper ranks, he addressed them bluntly... 'Well now, a bit of real work has come your way, the sort of fight you have been longing for. So, brave hearts, let the Trojans have it!' So he spoke and put fresh heart and courage into every man, and the ranks closed when they heard their lord."</quote><fnote>Homer, Iliad, 16:156-211 </fnote>Here Achilles is motivating his Myrmidons so that Patroclus can lead them into battle gloriously and drive the Trojans back from the Greek ships. In a way it could be argued that Achilles is doing this selflessly because he does not seem to get anything back from motivating his troops on behalf of Patroclus. However, it should be noted that as soon as Patroclus departs he immediately prays and sacrifices to the gods in an attempt to ensure that his companion is protected when he goes into battle. Another example of this type of leadership can be seen when Agamemnon goes down the battle lines inspecting all of the various contingents of the Greek army fighting under his complete command. He rebukes Diomedes, Odysseus and Menestheus and praises Idomeneus, Ajax, and Teucer. When he comes to inspect Nestor's forces we are presented with the one character that right through the poem is able to balance the values of heroism and leadership almost perfectly. On numerous occasions throughout the course of the Iliad Nestor organises and encourages the army or smaller groups of soldiers and is called upon as the voice of reason and wisdom. He does this not for his own gain or glory but for the glory of the Greeks as a people since, try as he might, he is far too old to fight against the Trojans, and he is trying to win and thus end the war as swiftly as possible. In book 4 when Agamemnon inspects the Greek forces we see that Nestor is simply a leader, he goes into battle specifically to order and organise his troops from his chariot. <quote>"There he came across Nestor the clear-voiced speaker from Pylos, whom he found preparing his men to fight and marshalling them under their leaders... He placed his inferior troops in the middle so that even the unwilling would be forced to fight... So Nestor used the experience he had gained in battles long ago to inspire his troops... 'I shall still be with my charioteers and in command. Their tactics and orders come from me - that's the privilege of age - even if the spear is left to the younger men than myself, who can rely on their muscle."</quote>Nestor is also called upon as the wise old warrior to settle the dispute between Achilles and Agamemnon that arises in book 1 after Agamemnon is forced to return his prize Chyseis and as compensation for his loss he takes Achilles' prize Briseis. Nestor cannot settle this dispute but I think it would be fair to say that angering the best Greek warrior by stealing his prize is a blatant example of bad leadership on Agamemnon's part considering that had he accepted Chyses' offer the war could have already been finished. The root of this feud is an example of a time when if Agamemnon had been more heroic and had given up Chriseis on behalf of the army he would have been regarded as a far superior leader. However, Agamemnon is forced to take another hero's prize because he is afraid of how the army he is leading will see him if he is without one. This fear amongst heroes of the opinions of their peers is known as aidos (as explained in my literary criticism). "The Homeric warrior is driven to action by a need for social validation: status respect, honour in the eyes of other men." This need for social validation is the one key concept that makes the question of whether leadership is compatible with heroism in the Iliad a complicated one. Heroism is about escaping aidos through glorifying one's name in battle by achieving fame (kleos) and therefore receiving the respect (time) of one's peers. My literary criticism discusses this in relation to Hector in book 22 as he waits to face Achilles and therefore I will omit the topic of Hector in relation to aidos from this essay since it is examined elsewhere and instead I shall show how it used in a slightly different way in the poem. The sense of shame inherent in aidos is used by Ajax in Book 15 to motivate the Greek soldiers and to encourage them to continue to fight which is a clever use of this concept as a powerful form of leadership. Ajax's comment that more lives will be saved because the warriors fear disgrace shows that this is an example of good leadership and heroism. <fnote>Fowler (2004), p77 </fnote><quote>"Fellow warriors, be men, think of your reputations, and in the heat of battle fear nothing but dishonour in each other's eyes! When warriors fear disgrace, then more are saved than killed. There is no honour or safety to be found in flight."</quote><fnote>Homer, Iliad, 15:561-564 </fnote>Leadership is in essence a selfless quality as it involves putting the good of others before the good of yourself whereas heroism is a selfish quality where the better you are the more glory you can gain. This fact is the one thing that makes it impossible to say without doubt that in the Iliad both leadership and heroism are compatible. It is true that to a certain extent both can coexist, we have seen this through the likes of Patroclus and Nestor, however, since neither Achilles nor Hector can sustain both good leadership and good heroism for long periods of time we are led to question whether it is fair to connect these two virtues. In the end it would appear to me that heroes are primarily motivated by the chance to prove themselves in battle since there is no other way of gaining renown on the same scale as that which one can achieve from slaughtering the enemy. <quote>"The men of the heroic race command wonder because of their strength, their fierceness, their superhuman force, in some cases their heightened wisdom or skill in the arts of speech: to that extent they are models to be imitated by young men... however, the energy that underlies such excellence is liable to push the hero to dangerous extremes of anger, passion and recklessness: so that his exalted status makes him deeply problematic if one tries to take him as a model of moral excellence."</quote><fnote>Fowler (2004), p80 </fnote><heading>In the Iliad, is being a good hero compatible with good leadership? Literary Criticism:By </heading><quote>"So they spoke in tears to their dear son. But all their entreaties did not shake Hector's resolve: he stayed where he was, awaiting the approach of awe-inspiring Achilles. As a mountain snake waits for a man beside its hole: it has swallowed poisonous herbs, its anger is dreadful and it stares intimidatingly at him, wreathing its coils round its lair - so Hector, his determination unquenchable, refused to retreat. He leaned his glittering shield against the projecting tower and, deeply troubled, reflected on the situation: 'What am I to do? If I retire behind the gate and wall, Polydamas will be the first to point the finger of blame at me that, on this last accursed night when godlike Achilles rose up again, I did not take his advice and order a withdrawal into the town. It would have been much better if I had. As it is, having sacrificed the army to my own reckless stupidity, I would feel nothing but shame before the Trojan men and the Trojan women in their trailing gowns. I could not bear to hear some second-rater say: 'Hector trusted in his own right arm and lost an army.' But it will be said, and then it would be far better for me to stand up to Achilles and either kill him and come home alive, or be killed by him gloriously in front of Ilium." Homer, Iliad 22.90-110 (translated by E.V. Rieu, revised).</quote>The question of whether it is possible to be a good leader and a good hero simultaneously in Homer's heroic society is one whose answer can vary depending on what specific part of the Iliad you read. By examining this passage in isolation we can learn much about the motivations and responsibilities of heroes and how this reflects on their leadership skills in turn. As I have alluded to in my main essay, heroism in Homeric literature is not the same as modern heroism, it is far more complex and thus many actions in the Iliad that may seem unheroic by our modern morals such as revenge are in fact the antithesis of this in Homer. This passage from Book 22 is a perfect example of this concept. The heroic society of the Iliad is one where status and reputation are of vital importance to the heroes. Their culture is a "shame culture" where heroes are motivated by the fear of being disgraced in front of their peers (the Greek word aidos) and to prevent this, heroes seek to achieve fame (kleos) and glory (kudos) by being successful in battle and thus receive the respect (time) from those around them that they deserve. This notion applies to Hector most prominently out of all the heroes in the poem. As we can see from the passage, Hector is unsure as to whether he has made the right decision in choosing to face Achilles alone in front of the walls of Troy and he admits to himself in his soliloquy that he has "...sacrificed the army to my own reckless stupidity." The passage describes Hector as a brave warrior, "...his determination unquenchable, refused to retreat." However when we put this passage into context, that is, that he has ignored the pleas of both his mother Hecabe and his father Priam, "So they spoke in tears to their dear son. But all their entreaties did not shake Hector's resolve", one begins to think that it is not really bravery keeping Hector where he is but more so than it is too late for him to turn back now. Hector has realised that he has made the wrong decision and doomed Troy to destruction but at the same time the aidos he will feel from the likes of Polydamas is preventing him from returning to safety behind the walls. Hector would rather try to achieve glory by fighting Achilles even though he suspects, as he mentions when speaking to his wife Andromache in book 6, that Troy will eventually fall. Furthermore, this duel between the two greatest heroes of each army can be seen as a microcosm of the whole Trojan War as a whole, and henceforth when Hector falls so does Troy. Hector's soliloquy reminds us of another soliloquy, that of the Trojan Agenor, at the end of Book 21 where he too questions whether he should face Achilles in battle or simply run away. The difference between these two episodes however is that Agenor seems to have no fear of aidos as Hector does. Perhaps this is because Agenor is not quite as highly ranked as Hector is or it could simply be because he is not very susceptible to aidos like Paris. This passage highlights the fact that the attainment of glory through heroism is in most cases a selfish practice that is not compatible with leadership since here Hector waits to fight Achilles not for patriotic reasons but because he seeks to glorify himself even if he must die doing so, without regard for what may happen to Troy. This makes Hector a somewhat tragic figure because his fatal flaw is his susceptibility to aidos which ultimately leads to his downfall. Hector's heroism here does not show any of his qualities as a leader, it highlights how bad a leader he can be at times. Even the simile at the beginning of the passage is reminiscent of another example of his bad judgement as a leader when in Book 12 he disregarded Polydamas' advice over the omen of an eagle carrying a snake in its mouth which it drops after being bitten by it. Hector misinterpreted this omen to mean that Zeus was with the Trojans. The simile itself represents how small and pathetic Hector is in comparison to "awe-inspiring Achilles." Hector is the snake guarding his lair (Troy) whilst Achilles is the man who it should be noted can be hurt by the snake but can also easily kill him. The simile also foreshadows Hector's death since it says that the snake "has swallowed poisonous herbs." It should be noted that the act of Hector standing up to Achilles, even though he doubts that he will be able to beat him, is very heroic. It simply does not appear to be this way in this case because it is does not comply with what we believe he should do as leader of the Trojans. 