Virgil's "Aeneid" is an epic poem detailing the founding of Rome by the Trojan refugees who escaped from Troy before its destruction which is centred on Roman mythology and foretells the glory of the contemporary Emperor Augustus Caesar through allegory and divine prophecy. It also presents us with a new type of hero, a Roman hero, in contrast to the Greek heroes of Homer's epic poems "The Iliad" and "The Odyssey". Aeneas' heroism can be defined as "Roman" due to a number of characteristics that we see through his actions in the poem, the most obvious of these being the quality of pietas that Virgil frequently associates him with in his epithets, for example: "Devout Aeneas" and "Dutiful Aeneas". Pietas is in itself a quality that seems to encompass many of the good Roman values that Augustus attempted to promote along with his "Golden Age" and thus it is complex as R.D. Williams describes, <fnote>Aeneid Bk8 l84 p191 translated by D. West </fnote><fnote>Aeneid Bk6 l175 p138 translated by D. West </fnote><quote>"The quality of being pius... may be shown by subordinating one's own desire to various other loyalties: (i) to the gods and their requirements... (ii) to one's country...; (iii) to one's family, a form of devotion to others which the Romans specially esteemed; (iv) to one's friends; and (v) to one's subordinates."</quote><fnote>R.D. Williams "Aeneas and the Roman Hero" p30 </fnote>Aeneas' pietas is obviously associated with his compliance with the wishes of the divine and his constant adherence to ritual sacrifice and worship in order to appease the gods which was a key value in Roman society. Indeed Aeneas is often given the epithet "Father Aeneas" which portrays him as the paterfamilias of the remaining Trojans and thus also the paterfamilias of the entire Roman race. His religious pietas can also be seen when he mourns those who died in Troy, even though he himself wishes he had fallen in battle against the Greeks and tells of his uncontrollable rage when trying to save Troy which can be read as a kind of patriotic sentiment for his homeland and therefore Rome also as W.A. Camps notes, <fnote>Aeneid Bk8 l28 p190 translated by D. West </fnote><quote>"When Aeneas speaks of himself also as acting 'more from blind impulse than from reasoned hope' in the furious resistance which he makes for as long as resistance is possible he is not confessing a failure of self-control but describing a reaction that to a Roman would seem proper and natural in a man whose country was falling in ruins about him."</quote><fnote>W.A. Camps "An Introduction to Virgil's Aeneid" p26 </fnote>Furthermore, we see Aeneas' religious piety when he obeys the commands of Jupiter and Mercury by leaving Carthage to continue his journey towards Italy and when he leaves the underworld resolved to finish his quest to found the future city of Rome because he understands that there is more at stake than simply his own future. He is told that if he does not leave then he will be depriving his son of greatness and contemporary Romans would have completely understood his feelings due to the importance of the family in Roman society. In fact, pietas towards his family is the quality that Aeneas was by far the most famous for in Augustan Rome and the image of him carrying his father on his back either with the gods of Troy or his son Ascanius in the other hand is the archetypal image of the ideal pious Roman caring for his family and it was thus displayed on the coins of Caesar. The family was a very important institution in Rome obviously because of the importance of inheritance from father to son but it was also seen as a simple moral to show respect to one's elders which is exactly what Aeneas does for the majority of the poem. The bond between Aeneas and his father Anchises is very strong in regard to the love that the son has for the father (which can be compared to the relationship between Augustus and his adoptive father Julius Caesar), and it is the pietas inherent in this bond between father and son that allows Aeneas to face the terrors of the underworld and return from below as a new man who is determined to fulfil his destiny not because it will benefit him in any personal way but because it is in his pious nature as a Roman to toil for the greater good. It is after the death of Anchises that we see another element of the Roman heroism evident in Aeneas through the sorrow that surfaces when his father is no longer with him. It could be argued (as W.A. Camps does) that Aeneas becomes weaker and more vulnerable after his father's death and that this weakness could be the reason for the extent of his stay in Carthage. However this weakness also acts as means of humanising Aeneas, portraying him as an imperfect and perhaps flawed hero who cannot always cope on his own with the burden he must carry, as R.D. Williams remarks, <fnote>W.A. Camps "An Introduction to Virgil's Aeneid" p6 </fnote><quote>"We realise at the outset that the hero of the poem is not someone of superhuman strength who can retain his confidence in all adversity, but rather a brave man near the end of his tether." </quote><fnote>R.D. Williams "Aeneas and the Roman Hero" p33 </fnote>However, in the poem we see the evolution of Aeneas from lost Trojan prince into Aeneas the Roman hero essentially through labor, a value that was central to Augustan culture and Roman heroism. On his journey to found a new home for the Trojans, Aeneas must overcome great adversity through hard work, selflessness, and determination, things that many Romans would have had to deal with during the hard times of civil war and thus would consider to be relevant in a so-called "national poem" that dealt with the origins of their great race. Furthermore, the basis of Rome was still agriculture, and the crucial aspects of labor were also of great importance to the farmers of the time who were singled out by Augustus as the Romans that all other Romans should aspire to be like. As Galinsky details, <quote>"The new Golden Age, identified with the existence of the farmer, is full of stress and depends on ongoing effort; it is not finite and god-given, but needs to be worked for every day anew. Fulfilment comes in large part from the incessant effort to reach that goal rather than from actually arriving at it." </quote><fnote>K. Galinsky "Augustan Culture" p121 </fnote>It is through labor that Virgil further humanises Aeneas showing him struggling against great hardship and not always reacting the right way, for example, when he reaches Carthage he would most probably have preferred to stay simply because it was the easier option and that would have been the end of his troubles. However, Aeneas is a Roman hero and therefore he will endure and he will not give up until he has established a new Trojan city in Italy even though at times it may seem impossible to do so. Aeneas is not the invincible superhuman hero that Achilles is, neither is he the resourceful and cunning Odysseus, instead he is a Roman. He is a figure that every Roman can identify with because he is flawed, he is human, in the same way that every other Roman is. Thus when Aeneas finally reaches Italy he must face the polar opposite of everything that he embodies, represented by the Italian hero Turnus. Turnus is reminiscent of the Greek/Homeric heroes of "The Iliad" and "The Odyssey" in regard to the fact that he is associated with furor rather than pietas causing him to be a far more primitive character than Aeneas as he simply cannot control himself and his emotions. In contrast to Turnus, Aeneas is a far more controlled fighter who shows clemency (another Augustan ideal) to all those who he feels deserve it, tries to shed as little blood as possible in an effort to obtain peace rather than war (another very Augustan virtue, a love of peace), and he cares for his men in a far more personal way than Turnus. The idea of furor would most probably have brought to mind memories of the civil war in the majority of contemporary Romans and thus they would most probably also be able to see the parallel between Augustus (then known as Octavian) and his battle with Anthony which was also a battle that was seen as a conflict between furor and pietas. And of course, pietas won out in the end leading to the establishment of the "Golden Age" of peace and prosperity and thus when Aeneas defeats Turnus and founds the city that will later become Rome it is seen as milestone in Roman history that the "Golden Age" of Augustus should be compared to. Returning to the subject of the virtue of clemency (which was very highly respected by Augustus and the Romans), it would be unjust to mention clemency without discussing the death of Turnus which is a key example of Aeneas not displaying the clemency one would expect from a Roman hero. Many classicists such as W.A. Camps say that Aeneas' brutal slaying of Turnus is poetically just considering that Turnus broke the treaty agreed between himself and Aeneas to stop the fighting and therefore he does not deserve to be granted clemency when he has been defeated. This view is based on the fact that the Romans considered the keeping of treaties and promises to be a virtue of great importance and thus Camps is trying to say that Aeneas reaction of furor is necessary in order for Aeneas to be a true Roman hero as he must punish the one who instigated the bloodshed in the civil war. However, I am more inclined to side with the idea that Aeneas kills Turnus not through heroism but purely through uncontrollable furor and that Virgil concludes the poem this way to prevent anyone from labelling the poem as, "...a commissioned piece in support of the Augustan agenda." Aeneas' uncharacteristic lapse in self-control once again shows us that Aeneas is mortal, he is a real Roman rather than a mythological superhuman who is invincible and unchanging and hence it should have been easier for the Romans of the Augustan age to relate to Aeneas since it would seem more likely that someone like him really did exist at one time. <fnote>W.A. Camps "An Introduction to Virgil's Aeneid" p29 </fnote><fnote>S. Wiltshire "Public and Private in Vergil's Aeneid" p138 </fnote>In conclusion, Aeneas' heroism is Roman because he embodies all the virtues of the Augustan "Golden Age" of peace and prosperity such as pietas, labor, clemency, and love of peace, but his heroism can also be defined as Roman because it is flawed and far more human than the Greek heroism of the Homeric epics. We see Aeneas commit a number of atrocities such as human sacrifices and the murder of Turnus, however despite these problems we still see him as a hero because we feel emotionally attached to him having followed him through so much hardship and sorrow and through his moments of frailty and imperfectness we discover his determination to put his own feelings aside for the good of others which makes him a true Roman hero as R.D. Williams comments, <quote>"The task he has undertaken, that of setting going the Roman way of life in a hostile and alien world, is almost too great for his strength. But he does not give up - this is the essence of the new kind of heroism." </quote><fnote>R.D. Williams "Aeneas and the Roman Hero" p34 </fnote>