<heading>Gorgias , Encomium to Helen</heading><heading>1) In what ways do your chosen texts invite you to place them in their historical context? </heading>When Gorgias first arrived in Athens as a Sicilian Ambassador in 427 BCE, he boasted that he could answer any question thrown at him, not because he knew everything, but because he was so confident in his ability to convince people that he was well-versed in everything by his rhetoric. The sentence he chose as an opening verse for this text seems to clearly indicate that he was well aware of how he could get attention from his listeners in his time and could lead them to believe in the authenticity of his argument. He begins his argument by mentioning what makes a virtuous city, and brings up the qualities of 'goodness' which probably most of the Greek audience would happily accept and sympathise with. After showing that he shares the same value with the audience and he is going to construct his argument on that ground, Gorgias moves onto his main subject: his defence in the case of Helen. This choice of the topic itself may also help us to read the text within its historical context, because the character of Helen has a more universal fixed implication in ancient Greece rather than in the modern world. As we could read from his last sentence of the text, what Gorgias is aiming to obtain by writing this account seems to be the reassertion that if it is used wisely and effectively, the speech could overturn even one of the most long-lived and firmly established 'prejudices'. And for this purpose, and for his own amusement to see how far his rhetoric can take his audience, he chose to defend Helen, who was considered to be no doubt the most notorious and totally 'unpitiable' adulteress ever among ancient Greeks. <fnote>Ferguson in Classical Philology, available online </fnote><heading>2) What do you consider to be the most important structural and linguistic features of your chosen text? </heading>Gorgias was a sophist who laughed at those who claimed to be teaching arête, and restricted himself to be promoting man's ability in making a good speech: later his attitude was criticised severely by Plato. His language in this text appears to be corresponding to his claim and be indicating that he is not much concerned about what is the truth, but is more careful in dealing with what 'seems to be' true. In fact, the text gives us an impression that he actually does not care if Helen was guilty or not, because according to his belief the function of speech is not reproducing the reality, but creates certain effects in emotions of the listeners. He took the position of defending Helen, simply because he wanted to prove that speech is not a mere reflection of things, but is actually capable of creating a particular perspective towards things. <fnote>Segal in Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, available online </fnote><fnote>Rosenmeyer in American Journal of Philology , available online </fnote>To make his argument 'looking like' a correct answer or a right position to take Gorgias employs a variety of techniques, and I suggest that this is the most notable structural and linguistic feature of this text. Firstly, Gorgias analyses this case from mythological material rationally and logically, just as scientists conduct scientific experiments on their research object and lead the theoretical analysis out of the result. Ford focuses on this characteristic of this text by quoting Jacques Jouanna's argument that there are numerous similarities in rhetoric and ideas between Hippocrates' On Winds and Gorgias' Encomium of Helen, and concludes that Gorgias might be trying to adopt a medical scientist's point of view in order to develop his theory in a convincing way, and he keeps the same tone throughout his discussion. Indeed, his argument is very mathematic from beginning to end. To persuade his audience that accusing Helen is unreasonable, he first enumerates all the possible reasons why Helen needed to depart to Troy, and then proves the proposition is false by showing all the reasons are invalid, and therefore lead the conclusion inductively that his hypothesis is true. <fnote>Ford, p.177 </fnote>Secondly, there is a certain attraction in the rhythm of his speech composed of effective repetition and symmetric sentence structure. Let us look at some sentences from the second paragraph of the text as an example. The first sentence of the paragraph reads as follows: 'That the woman who is subject of this speech was pre-eminent among pre-eminent men and women'. By using the same word 'pre-eminent' twice, Gorgias not only does successfully make a comfortable rhythm in his speech here, but also the 'pre-eminent' is efficiently emphasised and featured so that the speech assures its audience that pre-eminent is the keyword in this sentence. The following sentence, on the other hand, deploys the contrast and symmetric structure beautifully. In fact, the whole sentence is composed chained-symmetry following one after another. The first part of this long sentence, 'it is clear that her mother was Leda, and her actual father was a god and her reputed father was a mortal', already shows two symmetric structure overlapping each other: In the larger sense this is a contrast of the identity of mother and father, but second part can be further divided into two sections which are contrasting 'actual' 'immortal' father and 'reputed' 'mortal' father. In the same way, the rest of the sentence is also constructed with repeated use of similar sentence structures, synonymous and antonymous phrases. These techniques of repetition of words and contrastive structure of sentences appear repeatedly throughout this speech, which possibly makes the impression of the text more attractive, convincing and sophisticated. <heading>3) What other aspects of your chosen text seem especially significant and why? </heading>He declares that he 'considers all poetry speech with meter.' In other words, he admits that poetry has the same sort of power in influencing, or even controlling the listener's mind as speech. Although there is no means left for us to find out if it comes out of his respect towards his great predecessor or simply he uses it to win a support from his audience, we can trace several ideologies shared between Homer and Gorgias in this text. Firstly, in the very beginning Gorgias points out that Helen surpasses all the 'pre-eminent' Greeks by her noble birth and decency obtained from it as a reason why defending of Helen is such justifiable and reasonable. The reasoning that Helen is a kind of 'demi-god' and therefore she is the best of the men and women, is very familiar in Homeric epic. Secondly, Gorgias makes it clear that if Helen's departure is caused either by predestination or the power of love, it is unreasonable to blame Helen because both predestination and love come from gods and it is impossible for human to overcome divine power. The idea that 'gods are stronger than human being; both in force and in wisdom and in other respects' is again very predominant one throughout the Homeric epic. It must be noted, however, that Gorgias' admiration towards poetry comes from a very different perspective from later critics. Aristotle, for example, argues that only well calculated tragic actions can satisfactory bring pity and fear, but Gorgias believes that fear and pity comes from logos through which the story is told, rather than plot. <fnote>Burian, p.141 </fnote><heading>Pliny ,  Letters 6.16</heading><heading>1) In what ways do your chosen texts invite you to place them in their historical context? </heading>The main topic of this letter, the eruption of Vesuvius and the death of Pliny the elder, was an incident happened in AD 79. The letter is said to be written most probably in AD 106, and Pliny was born in either AD 61 or 62, so he was about seventeen or eighteen years old when he lost his uncle and he is recalling the catastrophe nearly thirty years after he experienced it. The letter is, however, composed of extremely detailed description of what Pliny the younger actually witnessed and what was reported by his uncle's companions after the incident. After the preface of the letter, Pliny begins his story-telling of what happened on 24 th of August in Ad 79 with describing his uncle's everyday routines. He testifies that his uncle 'had been working in the sun, had taken a cold bath, lunched while lying down, and was working at his books' when his wife called his attention to the unusual appearance of the mountain. It is very interesting to see how this sort of life was considered to be praiseworthy among the Roman citizens, and how it would contribute to his uncles fame that Pliny mentions not only his uncle's heroic deed concerning the eruption, but also his everyday lifestyle. The importance of these everyday routines is featured again in the middle of the letter, when Pliny praises both his uncle and his friend Pomponianus for bathing and dining together in the midst of the disaster, pretending that everything was Pliny admires this action as very 'courageous'. Pliny also emphasises the fact that his uncle 'certainly slept' in that night near the erupting mountain, in order to give Tacitus a proof that his uncle was an extraordinarily brave man. <fnote>Sullivan in Classical Philology, available online </fnote><heading>2) What do you consider to be the most important structural and linguistic features of your chosen text? </heading>Obviously the form of this text is a letter. Sherwin-White, however, points out that Pliny's letters are different from those which are written with no thought of publication and merely consist of a mixture of ideas, advices, emotions and reports. According to his article, Pliny was from a 'wealthy, leisured, and over-educated' society, part of which we could read from the fact that the mere eighteen-years-old boy refused to go to an exciting expedition of volcano because he prefers to study. For him and his fellow scholars, therefore, the letter-writing is not only a mere mean to report news to each other, but also one of the important exercises to polish their writing skills. Consequently, as we can see, Pliny's letters are all written in the 'best Latin prose' and in some parts it sounds almost like an epic novel. <fnote>The full article of Sherwin-White is available online. </fnote>Let us analyse more closely some of the features of Pliny's letter which are not very letter-like. Firstly, Pliny's description of what his uncle did and how dangerous the island was is very lively and vivid, even though Pliny actually did not eye-witness most of these events. Presumably from the middle of the third paragraph all the things written down are either reported to him by somebody else who was there with his uncle or possibly even partially composed of Pliny's imagination, but we cannot see any change in his writing style for what he actually saw and for what he was reported to. Everything is written as if Pliny eye-witnessed all of them, and he even adopts his uncle's psychological description when he explains that his uncle 'wondered whether to turn back' but after a moment of thought he turned down the idea. Secondly, the characterisation of Pliny the elder is almost like a hero in epic poems. Pliny repeatedly emphasises his uncle's exceptional braveness and the spirit of self-sacrifice: his uncle alone is 'hurrying to the place which everyone else was hastily leaving' to rescue his friend Ractina, his uncle alone was trying to comfort the fear that all the others had in common, and his uncle alone made a decision because 'one reason outweighed the other' while others chose the same out of fears. The fact that this letter was structured with extremely careful literally observation and written in the aesthetic language makes this text more than just a report of the incident, but rather like a bibliographical story about the heroic death of Pliny the elder. <heading>3) What other aspects of your chosen text seem especially significant and why? </heading>In the beginning and the end of his letter, Pliny appears to be emphasising the difference between epistolary and historiography. Pliny says that letters are to be read by single or few friends but history is 'written for all to read', and thus 'immortal fame awaits' his uncle if Tacitus records his death based on this letter. We have already examined that Pliny's letter includes more than a mere report of how he died because of the eruption of Vesuvius, but also his heroic characters and his lifestyle. One of the reasons why Pliny wrote this account like a short novel is, as we have seen in previous sections, that he was so interested in literature that letter-writing was more than just enumerating facts for him. But if we move our focus from Pliny to Tacitus, the receiver of the letter, we can suggest another factor which might have influenced Pliny's decision to write his letters in an artistic way. It has been pointed out by many scholars that Tacitus' historical account is, compared to his predecessor Levy's, focusing greatly on personal portrayal of each individual character. In fact, the trend in Roman historiography itself was shifting towards 'biography' in Tacitus' time. It is, therefore, very likely that not only Pliny wanted to describe his uncle's death dramatically, but Tacitus also needed personal account and the life story of Pliny the elder to produce for his historiography. Whichever the truth is, it is very ironic that the death of his uncle seems to have obtained immortality from epistolary more than historiography after all, contrary to Pliny's expectation. <fnote>Account of Tacitus in this section is based on the article by Daitz, available online. </fnote>