<heading>Introduction:</heading>In this experiment the relationship between the Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) in a sample and the number of colony forming units is going to be examined. It is going to be determined whether there is any correlation between these two. The sensitivity of the ATP method and the resazurin method are also going to be compared. The ATP method is finally going to be used to determine the cleanliness of two surfaces. ATP is found in all living cells but, upon cell death, will quickly disappear. The structure of the ATP molecule is shown below; <figure/>ATP will react with Luciferin to form a photon (light). A machine may then be used to detect the level of light produced (which is at very low levels) and therefore the amount of ATP present. The following equation shows this;  FORMULA  This means that the level of ATP on a food preparation surface can be used to give an indication of the cleanliness of that surface. Because this method detects ATP, it will only detect levels in living cells. The cells that are likely to contain ATP on a food preparation surface are likely to be of two sources; either from food debris or, from microbiological cells. This is the major criticism of the ATP bioluminescent testing method; it detects ATP other than that from microbiological sources. Having said this, however, food preparation surfaces should be clean and therefore free from any food debris as well as being free from microbiological cells. The system may therefore be used as a good indicator as to how well a cleaning regime has been completed. The ATP bioluminescent method will give a result as to how clean a food preparation area is within a couple of minutes. This is far more rapid than the traditional methods which can take between three and five days. The other advantage of the bioluminescence method is that very little training is required to obtain results in which confidence may be expressed. The only piece of equipment needed is the machine itself and no laboratory or competent microbiology professionals are required. Another fairly rapid way to estimate the number of microbiological cells on a food preparation surface is to measure the reduction of certain electron acceptors. This reduction occurs as a result of either respiratory or dehydrogenase activity within the cell. Resazurin is an example of a dye which will change colour when something goes from an oxidised to a reduced state. It may therefore be used to indicate the number of microbes present, the rate of change of colour of the dye also giving an indication. <heading>Method:</heading>All procedures described below should be carried out in an aseptic manner, where ever possible. For example, the preparation of dilutions described below should be carried out near a Bunsen burner so that the rising column of hot air ensures that it is done in an aseptic environment. The first stage of the experiment was the preparation of a series of dilutions which were to be tested. 1ml of the sample culture (E. Coli at a dilution of 10 -0) was aseptically removed from the tube and pipetted using a Gilson pipette with a disposable tip into 9ml maximum recover diluent (MRD). The 1ml of E. Coli culture and 9ml MRD give a solution of dilution 10 -1. Having thoroughly mixed this sample dilution, 1ml was removed and added to another tube containing 9ml MRD. This formed a solution with a 10 -2 dilution. This procedure was repeated until a dilution of series to 10 -6 was obtained. The spread plate method may then be used to determine the number of viable bacteria in the culture sample. To do this, pipette 0.1ml of the various dilutions onto PCA plates and spread over the entire surface of the plate using a sterile spreader. Once the fluid on the surface of the plate has been completely absorbed, the plates may be incubated at 25°C for three days. After this period, the plates may be removed from the incubator and any colonies can be counted. As a guide, only plates with between 30 and 300 colonies should be counted. If there are more than 300 colonies on the surface of any one agar plate the colonies may have started to affect the growth of one another and this makes it hard to express confidence in any colony count that may be obtained. The ATP levels in each of the dilutions were then measured using the Hy-Lite method as described in the practical course hand book. Basically a Hy-lite sampling pen was taken and this was used to absorb some of the sample dilution to be detected. The pen is the snapped closed which mixes the sample with the Luciferin. The pen is then placed in the Hy-lite machine and the level of light being emitted from the sample is recorded - being displayed in relative light units (RLU). Doing this for the dilution series obtained will give a range of RLU values which may then be plotted on a graph and the correlation between ATP concentration in RLUs and number of colonies at any given dilution may then be plotted. The final stage of the experiment involves monitoring the reduction of resazurin by bacterial suspension. To do this, add 1.0ml resazurin (0.1%) to each of the tubes in the dilution series. The tubes should then be placed in a water bath at 37°C and their colour examined every ten minutes. Any colour changes which occur should be recorded - the changes should have of occurred within an hour. The colour changes that resazurin goes through as it oxidises are shown below; Resazurin (blue) resofurin (pink) dihydroresofurin (colourless) <heading>Results:</heading><table/><table/><table/> FORMULA  <table/><heading>Conclusion:</heading>Firstly looking at table one, it can be seen that as the sample dilution increased, the relative light produced decreases - this is due to the presence of ATP in the sample decreasing. This is what would be expected and, if the average column is looked at, it can be seen that there is a tenfold difference in RLU between each dilution. This too would be expected as each sample is diluted by 90% when making subsequent lower dilutions. Table 2 shows the class results for the total number of colonies in the E. Coli culture. The class results are all fairly close together with 4.22×10 8 being the lowest and 1.6×10 9 being the highest. This may sound a wide range but considering it's at powers as high as it is we can be fairly confident in the counts obtained. The average number of colony forming units in the sample culture was calculated to be 8.1 × 10 8. this tells us that in a neat (i.e. 100) sample there would have been 8.1 × 10 8 colonies. From this it is possible to work out how many colonies there should have been at the subsequent dilutions. With each decrease in dilution there is a tenfold decrease in the number of colonies. Therefore, for example, at 10 -1, there would have been a possible total of 8.1 × 10 7 colony forming units. With this in mind it can be calculated how many colonies there were at each of the respective dilutions used for the Hy-lite part of the experiment. The two sets of data may then be plotted against one another (taking the log values of each set of data) to show the correlation between RFU from ATP and the actual colony count. The R value can be used to express the level of significance of the correlation between two sets of data. The closer the R value is to one, the more correlation there is between the two sets of data. Looking at the graph it can be seen that an R value of 0.9903 was obtained. This means that it can be said with confidence that there is significance correlation between the relative light units produced by the ATP/ Luciferin reaction and the number of colonies present. The r value may be calculated using the following equation; r = 1 - (6 FORMULA d 2) / n (n 2 - 1). The final part of the experiment looked at the hy-lite system and whether it could be used to distinguish between an infected and uninfected surface. Looking at the results in table 4 it can be seen that there is a clear difference between the RFU values obtained for sample A and sample B. Looking at table 4 it would be said that sample A was contaminated and sample B was clean. However, the difference between the two readings is not that great considering that the values obtained are right at the lower limit of detection of the Hy-lite system. The level of confidence we can express in the results is therefore not that great. There are a few reasons why the difference between the two samples was not that great. It maybe because the two sample were prepared to far in advance of the practical class and this could means that either the ATP is used by the cell and therefore no more remains for detection. Or that the bacteria on the contaminated sample were able to spread to the uncontaminated sample due to their close proximity. Looking at the resazurin part of the experiment it can be seen that it suggests that there are colonies present in sufficient quantities at the 10 3 dilution to change its colour. This is a good as a rough estimate as to the number of colonies present but as it is not quantitative it is not as good as the Hy-lite system. <heading>References:</heading>Prescott, Harley and Klein, (2002) Microbiology 5th Edition, New York, McGraw Hill. Adams M.R. and Moss M.O. (2000) Food Microbiology - 2nd edition, Cambridge, The Royal Society of Chemistry  URL  (16/11/2003) <heading>Questions:</heading>a) ATP has a relative atomic mass of 350. If the machine is able to detect 1000 fg (fg = fentogram = 10 -15g) which, a sensitive machine should be able to. In terms of ATP mol it should be able to detect 2.9×10 -13 mol. b) In terms of biological cells a sensitive machine can detect around 100 bacterial cells. In practice though, this is likely to be between 10 -3 and 10 -4 cells. The correlation between the ATP concentration and the concentration of bacteria is very marked. This can be seen when looking at the R 2 value, the closer the number is to one, the more significance in the correlation between the two sets of data. Here, the R 2 value was 0.99 which is very close to 1. The ATP assay was able to detect differences in the level of contamination between the two pieces of wood. However, the levels of ATP were at the lower limits of the capability of the Hy-lite machine. This means, although it is possible to say that it was the piece of wood 'A' that was contaminated it cannot be expressed with any confidence. The major problem/criticism with the ATP assay method is that it does not solely account for ATP from bacteria. It detects all ATP and, as all living cells contain ATP, any food particles left on food preparation food surfaces will also be taken into account. Having said this, if a food surface is clean it should have no food particles and therefore no ATP. On food production surfaces therefore, the aim should always be to obtain as low as possible ATP readings. The ATP assay method is clearly more sensitive when compared to the resazurin method. This is because the ATP assay method gives a quantitative result for the number of bacterial cells present whereas the resazurin method only give a rough identification as to the level of micro-organisms, to the nearest 10 -1. 