<heading>Introduction: </heading>Escherichia coli was first by Theodor Escherich in 1885. The enumeration of E.coli is a very important part of microbiological analysis of food samples and is of extreme importance to the food industry. Today's market demands fresh food on the shelf of our supermarkets immediately after production. Unfortunately this is not compatible with traditional microbiological techniques which can take a number of days (and in some cases up to a week). Other factors such as the demand for longer shelf lives and the strong market competition are also incompatible with traditional microbiological techniques. The demand for longer shelf lives has meant that producer with short shelf life products want to get their products on the supermarket shelf immediately after production rather than holding them till microbiological analysis has been completed. This is also a factor, when increasing the profitability of a company, if you can get your product out to the supermarket immediately after production, your company does not have to maintain it at a refrigerated hold which may be expensive. <enote>Adams M.R. and Moss M.O (2000), Food Microbiology 2nd Edition, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, p 217. </enote>E.coli is a 'catalase-positive, oxidase-negative, fermentative, short, Gram-negative, non-sporing rod'. There are a number of different methods of determining the number of coliforms in a food sample. The most traditional method is to prepare a dilution of the sample and then to plate this on to a medium such as violet red bile agar (VRBA). This can then be incubated for a period of 24hours at 35°C. After this period it is possible to give a count of the total number of coliforms present in the food sample. However, at this stage it is not possible to classify what type of coliform has been isolated, and further testing will be required. The two methods used in this investigation are classed as being rapid as they give a result of whether a colony is E.coli within 24-48 hours. <enote>Adams M.R. and Moss M.O (2000), Food Microbiology 2nd Edition, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, p 218. </enote>The membrane method utilises the E.coli are indole producing. The indole test solution identifies E.coli organisms with a pink colour upon addition of the solution. The 'Petrifilm' method is very quick and easy to use. No specialist equipment (other than an incubator) is required to use this media. Identification of colonies on the media after incubation for 48 hours at 30°C is as follows; red colonies are non E.coli coliforms and blue to blue red colonies are presumptive E.coli. <heading>Method:</heading>The method was followed as described in the 'Microbiological Hazards in Foods (Module FB2 FM2) Laboratory Schedule. To summarise two methods of rapid detection of E.coli were used; rapid detection using membranes and the 3M 'Petrifilm' media method. Where possible, all procedures below should be carried out aseptically (i.e. beside a Bunsen burner or in a laminar flow cabinet). <enote>Owens, Dr J.D, Microbiological Hazards in Foods - Laboratory Schedule, p2-1 to 5-6. </enote>Rapid enumeration of E.coli using membranes; <list>25g food sample (brie) placed in stomacher bag to which 225ml maximum recovery diluent (MRD) was added.Homogenise by stomaching for 1 minute.Transfer 10ml to a sterile bottle and prepare a dilution series to 10 2.Take two minerals modified agar plates and place a membrane on the agar surface - ensure membrane is flat on surface.Spread 0.5ml food suspension over the membrane on one plate and 0.1ml food suspension over the membrane of the other plate. Spread over entire surface of membrane but do not allow solution to go onto agar surface.Allow plates to stand until the membrane is dry and then incubate at 37°C for at least 30 minutes.After this short incubation transfer the membranes to tryptone bile agar and incubate these at 44°C for 18 to 24 hours.Once the incubation is complete remove lid of Petri dish and place inverted on bench surface.To this add approximately 1ml indole test solution and then carefully lower membrane onto this ensuring that the whole membrane is wetted by the solution.After five minute examine for indole producing (pink colonies) such as E.coli. </list>Detection of E.Coli using 3M's 'Petrifilm' media. For a more detailed guide to the use of 'Petrifilms' see page 3-7 of the laboratory schedule or visit  URL  /home/products/petrifilm/petriprod/ecoli/remind.pdf; <list>From the dilution prepared earlier take 1.0ml of 102 food suspension and pipette into the middle of the 'Petrifilm'.Carefully lower the upper film and then place the supplied spread over the top of the 'Petrifilm' allow to stand for 1 minute to allow the gel to solidify.Incubate at 44.5°C for 24 hours.Examine for colonies - red colonies are non E.coli coliforms and blue to blue red colonies are presumptive E.coli. </list><heading>Results:</heading>The results for the rapid enumeration of E.coli using membranes are detailed below. The results show a colony count for those colonies which turned pink upon the addition of indole test solution. Indole producing bacteria such as E.coli will turn a vivid pink colour within five minutes of adding the test solution. In both the cases below a dilution of 10 -2 was used. <table/>The results below show the total number of coliform colonies and total number of E.coli colonies detected using the 'Petrifilm' method described above. Red colonies are non E.coli coliforms and blue to blue red colonies are presumptive E.coli. <table/><heading>Discussion:</heading>Looking at the results it can be seen that both methods gave a fairly similar count as to the number of E.coli organisms present in the sample tested. The method using the membranes and indole test solution indicated that there were 2.7×10 3 E.coli organisms per gram of the sample and the 'Petrifilm' method indicated that there were 2.0×10 3 E.coli organisms per gram of the food sample tested. Therefore, as a result of both ,methods it can be stated that there was approximately 2.4×10 3 E.coli organisms per gram of brie (the food sample which was tested). That both methods give similar result and the repeats of each individual method were similar give confidence in the results obtained. This means that it can be stated that E.coli was present in the food sample that was examined although at this stage it cannot be determined which strain of E.coli was isolated and whether there was more than one strain present (there is likely to be a few). Cheese is made be fermenting milk (which in some cases may be un-pasteurised). It is therefore notoriously high in the levels of bacteria that it contains. A total viable count of the bacteria present in a sample of cheese that is considered to be of high microbiological quality will probably give a result of over 10 6 micro-organisms per gram. The majority of these will be completely harmless although some such as Listeria, Salmonella and  E.coli (HO157) may be pathogenic. It would therefore be expected to find E.coli and other bacteria in a sample of cheese so the levels detected are not surprising. Further testing of the E.coli species would be required to ensure it was not a pathogenic species such as HO157. This investigation could be taken further by trying to type the E.coli isolated. This could done by doing further biochemical tests or using a method such as the API method (a series of biochemical tests in one unit). Other methods of E.coli enumeration could also be looked at to see whether these too gave similar results. <heading>Questions:</heading>If there was an estimated E.coli population of 5×10 5 the following dilution would be required;  FORMULA  If plating 1ml dilution (i.e. pour plate method) and estimated colony population is 5×10 5, to get a ideal count of approximately 100 (between the 30 and 300 limit);  FORMULA  The results from the test in the question is shown below; <table/><list>Sample one that agglutinated both H and O sera may be identified as Salmonella. Sample two which agglutinated O but not H sera again suggests a Salmonella species that does not have well developed flagella. S.pullorum and S.gallinarium are non motile and therefore do not have flagellum. It maybe that sample two is one of these.Samples 3 to 4 which did not agglutinate either serum are not likely to be Salmonella species.</list>