<heading>Was and is Nestle's and other IFM members' marketing of infant formula 'unethical and immoral'? By what criteria should companies be judged? </heading>Infant milk formula is a common and useful product, which is widely used in the world as a substitute for breast milk if a mother chooses not to or cannot breast-feed her infant. The first infant formula was developed by Henri Nestlé in the 1860s in response to the high mortality rate among infants born to working class women in Switzerland who had no time to nurse. With regard to marketing of infant formula in Third World countries, Nestle and other IFM members ignore the actual conditions of the countries. They followed some of the same marketing techniques that they had followed with success elsewhere. One way of marketing was the distribution of free samples in hospitals to new mothers. In itself, the practice was neither illegal nor immoral. However, many of the new mothers who received samples were unable to correctly use the product when they returned home. One reason was the fact that they were poor, so that they were unable to buy sufficient quantities of the formula. Another reason was that they often used local, unsterilized water to mix the formula. But infant milk formula comes as a powder that is to be mixed in a specific proportion with sterilized water. So there must be pure water with which to prepare it, refrigeration to safely store unused prepared formula and customers must be able to read instructions and have the income to purchase adequate quantities of the product. Thus Nestle did not analyze either the market condition of the Third World or consumers there carefully. They marketed their products without considering the actual need of the consumers there. They should have applied the suitable marketing strategies to the local market. Referring to the what criteria companies should be evaluated, they might be judged by whether they abide by the rules set up by certain organisations------The International Code of WHO on Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes, regulations of Advertising Standards Authority, and rules of UNICEF and IFM. For example, The WHO has an International Code on Marketing of Breast-Milk Substitutes to protect mothers and babies from aggressive marketing and help them get accurate information. It stops manufacturers giving free supplies of baby milk to hospitals, promoting their products to the public or health workers, using baby pictures on their baby milk labels, giving gifts to mothers or health workers, giving free samples to mothers as well as promoting baby foods or drinks for babies under 6 months. Additionally, labels must be in a language understood by the mother, and must include a prominent health warning. (Christ's College Green Society, Oct 2002). <heading>Who should get the guidelines for ethical standards? Should it be left to organisations such as UNESCO and WHO, or should it be national governments, or should it be left to the market (consumers) to decide? Argue the pros and cons of the different groups becoming involved. </heading>'If there were no standards, we would soon notice' (International Organization for Standardization, Why Standards Matter?  26 January 2005). In addition to business principles, ethical standards definitely make a great deal contribution to most aspects of our lives. There have therefore been controversial issues regarding what parties should set the guidelines for ethical standards - whether the non-governmental organizations, the national governments or the markets/consumers. There has always been a general notion of the 'invisible hands', in which the market will sort an unethical behaviour out, thus promoting consumer protection. Any company will be shunned whenever unethical behaviour is unveiled. Building on the ground that consumers are at best position understanding what their interests are, it seems to be justified that consumers (or simply the market) should set the guidelines for ethical standards. Nevertheless, critics arise as consumers have the right to buy what they want, even if it is 'bad' for them. This point is particularly important in a market where there is a diversification of consumers - with different interests, tastes and behaviours. As such, national governments may be seen as more neutral positions to set up guidelines for ethical standards. National governments are perceived to intervene to stop proven dangerous practises. In relation to unethical behaviour, they should provide frameworks such as codes of practice and labelling regulations concerning ingredients as well as nutrition figures. National governments are considered to be in proper positions to set guidelines for ethical standards, for they can, on one hand, take close account the interests and needs of their consumers, and on the other hand recognise their respective economic terms, citizen's educational levels and bargaining powers. However, one question may be on the ability of national governments to include all voices of consumer and industry groups, especially in an era where business globalisation is taking place. And also the national governments may only focus on the satisfaction of their own standards rather than the others'. Thus, one may consider the involvement of international organisations, or more appropriately non-governmental international organizations (NGOs) like WHO and UNESCO, in setting up guidelines for ethical standards. NGOs observe the interests and needs of consumers in all countries. International guidelines for consumer protection are drawn from the consensus agreements between national delegations representing all the economic stakeholders involved - suppliers, users, government regulators and other interest groups such as consumers. In this way, international ethical standards provide a reference framework, or a common technological language, between suppliers and their customers. Benefits for the business groups include the widespread adoption of international ethical standards, which means that suppliers can base the development of their products and services on specifications that have wide acceptance in their sectors. More importantly, consumers benefit conformity of products and services to international principles, which provide assurance about quality, safety and reliability. Yet, it is often criticised that international standards, like the ISO (International Organisation for Standardisation) production and ethical standards, are sometimes voluntary. NGOs do not always have definite legal authority to enforce their implementation of ethical standards. Referring to Nestle case, the 'WHO code effectively allows almost no marketing. However, the code contains only recommended guidelines. They become mandatory only if individual governments adopt national codes through their own regulatory mechanisms.'(Principles of Marketing, Philip Kotler, et al, Concluding Concept 5 - Nestle: singled out again and again, 2001). Furthermore, another concern is that decisions made by NGOs may be greatly influenced by the powerful countries such as USA with majority voting powers. <heading> Did Nestle benefit from confronting the activities directly in court and winning? Should firms ever confront activities directly? Should firms withdraw from legitimate markets because of the justified or unjustified actions of pressure groups? </heading>Nestle did benefit a bit from confronting and winning the activists directly in court. Nestle won the legal case and hence the boycott was called off. Although the campaign continued, many organizations such as the US United Methodist Church rejected the boycott. The activists admitted that they were guilty of substantial and misrepresentation of unethical marketing behaviours as well as exaggerated figures. As such, Nestle gained back public justice for its milk powder. It was made easier for Nestle to rebuild its reputation in the future. Yet, it was a public-relations disaster for Nestle though it won the legal case. "Good public relation involves building good relations with the company's various publics by obtaining favorable publicity, building a good 'corporate image', and handling or heading off unfavorable rumors, stories and events"(Kotleral. 2001:626). It led to, to some extent, negative effects on the corporate image of Nestle. Activists to the firms are sometimes unavoidable. But it seems firms should not confront activists directly, for all parties can have their voices noticed especially in democratic societies. Firms have the responsibility to make the general public informed about the productions and marketing practices. This is especially true regarding ethical business behaviour related to the public. Firms should let the public aware the criticism and make all things transparent. On the other hand, firms could also learn from critics and improve their corporate behaviours. But it all depends on whether the criticism of the activists is too severe. In this case, firms have to get involved to legitimate markets to confront the activists and defend themselves against the unjustified actions of pressure group to retain public confidence. For justified actions of pressure groups, the involvement of sues have aroused public attention and the effect has been manifested. Thus it might be sensible for such firms to get into legitimate markets so as to sustain their business performances, which is very important concerning corporate strategies of firms. For both cases, corporate social responsibility places a crucial role in future growth of firms. <heading>Find another example of where a company has been accused of unethical behaviour/marketing. Explain the background to the situation and what happened/is happening. </heading>The McLibel Trial is regarded as the most serious crisis for McDonald's. McDonald's was accused of unethical marketing from the aspects of Rainforest Destruction, Nutritional Value, Marketing to Children, Cruelty to Animals and Labor and Union Issues. For example, some of McDonald's advertisements and literature were accused to have inaccurately claimed positive nutritional benefits for their food, and people who eat there frequently, "encouraged by McDonald's advertising," increased their risk of serious diseases. Children are led by advertisements to believe that it is a part of their normal lives to eat at McDonald's and take part in the 'McDonaldland' experience and that they are missing out one part of their normal lives if they do not take parts in. BACKGROUND: The McLibel Trial is a British court case between McDonald's and a postman and a gardener from London (Helen Steel and Dave Morris). It ran for two and a half years and became the longest ever English trial. The Judge delivered his verdict in June 1997. The verdict was devastating for McDonald's. The judge ruled that they had 'exploited children' with their advertising, produced 'misleading' advertising, been 'culpably responsible' for cruelty to animals, been 'antipathetic' to unionisation and paid their workers low wages. But Helen and Dave failed to prove all the points, thus the Judge ruled that they had libelled McDonald's and should pay 60,000 pounds damages. They refused and McDonald's knew better than to pursue it. In March 1999 the Court of Appeal made further rulings against McDonald's in relation to heart disease and employment. SITUATION NOW: As a result of the court case, the Anti-McDonald's campaign mushroomed, the press coverage increased exponentially, this website was born and a 60-minute documentary was produced. The legal controversy continues. It aroused many anti-McDonald's activities all over the world. This not only cost McDonald's financial loss but reputation declined. McDonald's has to pay great deal of money to settle many lawsuits all over the world. For example, McDonald's has agreed to pay $8.5 million to settle a lawsuit over artery-clogging trans fats in its cooking oils in California. McDonald's also so a lot of charities to rebuild its reputation. For example, McDonald's said it will donate $7 million to the American Heart Association and spend another $1.5 million to inform the public of its trans fat plans. 