Testing for the presence of drugs in a motorist's blood has recently become even more important as the amount of accidents involving motorists found to have illicit substances within their blood has dramatically increased. This has been shown by various surveys such as that carried out by TRL (Transport Research laboratories) Crowthorn 2001 who found that from 1985 - 2000; the amount of motorists involved in an accident whose blood contained illicit drugs had risen from 3% up to an alarming 18%. In response to this increase the government introduced Standardised Field Sobriety Tests (SFST) and Drug Recognition Examinations (DRE), which resulted in Field Impairment Testing (FIT) this is still in use today by police officers at the scene of an incident if they feel its cause may be due to the driver being impaired, through the use of drugs or alcohol. The examination consists of five simple tests, the first being pupil dilation, where the officer examines the motorists eyes for signs of constriction or dilation. The second is the Romburg test, during which the driver is asked to stand up straight, tilt their head back, close their eyes and then count to thirty. The third is a test of the driver's balance and coordination, where they have to walk nine paces in a straight line, heel to toe, firstly forwards and then backwards. The fourth is another test of the drivers balance involving the driver having to stand on one leg alternating between their left and right. The last test requires the driver to close their eyes, and touch the end of their nose with their index finger three successive times using both their right and left hands. If after these tests the police officer believes the motorist is impaired a doctor is called to the scene, they are then arrested and taken to the station where a blood sample can be collected for examination. If these blood tests are conclusive the penalties for taking drugs and driving are the same as that for drink driving. These include facing a minimum driving ban of a year, a fine of up to £5000, and the possibility of six months imprisonment. In the way of legislation within the UK, a driver is believed to be causing an offence if they are either driving whilst unfit through the use of drink or drugs, which can lead onto the second more serious offence of causing death by driving whilst unfit through drink or drugs (Road Traffic Act 1988). If either of these is suspected of being committed by an officer at a scene the offending motorists blood has to be analysed. The presence of a drug needs to be found in order to convict if they were driving whilst unfit but the presence of all drugs present needs to be established if a death occurred. The Forensic Science Service has developed a streamlined semi-automated method in order to analyse large amounts of blood samples simultaneously and so in the shortest amount of time. Due to their previous experience in testing motorist's blood they now only concentrate on a small section of drugs in their testing, as they found that 90% of drugs found within motorist's blood consisted either of amphetamines (which includes MDMA more commonly known as ecstasy), cannabis, benzodiayepimes (valium), cocaine, methadone, or opiates (heroin, morphine). The fact that drugs contained within an individual's blood will usually be present in the form of a metabolite/s needs to be remembered as when a drug goes through a persons liver it gets broken down and reconverted into metabolites called glucuronides. The analytical testing of a drivers blood consists of two main stages, the first is termed screening where it is determined if the sample contains any drugs, if these tests are positive the second stage known as confirmation is carried out which itself consists of two parts and determines the amount of drug or drugs present within the sample. Screening is a multi stage process as it can only provide information on whether or not one specific drug is present within a sample during a single experiment. It involves the use of an enzyme immunoassay (EIA); this is a piece of equipment consisting of a series of 96 wells. Inside each of these wells covalently bound is an antibody for this tests target drug, and to each of these wells a mixture containing the motorist's blood and the target drug labelled with enzyme is added. The drug if present and the enzyme labelled drug can then compete for the antibody sites now contained within the wells. After which the excess solution can be washed off and a dye containing substrate added, if the enzyme conjugate becomes attached to the surface it will cleave the dye from the substrate causing a coloured solution to develop. The presence of a strongly coloured solution in the wells means that there is little or no drug present within the motorist's blood, as no drug apart from that of the added enzyme labelled drug became attached to the antibody sites. There are a variety of enzymes that can be used to convert the colourless substrates to coloured soluble solutions; such as alkaline phosphatase this can cleave p-nitrophenyl phosphate producing a yellow solution consisting of p-nitrophenyl. Horseradish peroxidase can also be used this cleaves 3, 3', 5, 5' tetramethyl benzidine base or 2, 2' - azo - bis- (3-ethyl benzthiaydine-6-sulphuric acid) this is initially green and turns into an orange solution containing o-phenylenediamine. The accuracy of these screening tests depends on the target drug under analysis, as different drugs have differing minimum amounts that can be detected. Morphine (specific) has a very low minimum level of detection of only 10ng/ml, but Benzoylecogonine (more commonly known as cocaine) has a much higher minimum level of detection of 100ng/ml meaning screen testing is ten times less sensitive. The results produced from screening tests are usually classified as either "strong positive", "positive", or "insignificant / negative". The amount of drug found determines whether the result is considered "strong positive" or just "positive", these values differ for each drug as with their minimum levels of detection. Cocaine for example in order for a test to have a "positive" result has to be present within the range of 100 - 500ng/ml, and greater than 500ng/ml for a "strong positive" result. But free morphine only has to be found in amounts of between 10-50ng/ml to be considered a "positive" result and only greater than 50ng/ml for a "strong positive" test result. Once the screening of the blood sample has been completed and the presence of a single drug or drugs has been confirmed the amount of the drug or each of these drugs then needs to be determined, this is achieved through a process known as confirmation. Confirmation is a two-stage process, a blood sample of ~ 0.5ml is firstly collected and purified using solid-phase extraction. Then either GC-MS or LC-MS is carried out on the sample; GC-MS requires the extracts from the solid phase extraction to be derivatised before being analysed. This is necessary as some drugs in the sample may not be stable and decompose on heating, they also may not produce a very accurate or easily interpreted chromatograph and derivatisation would convert the drugs into relatively volatile forms which would solve these problems; LC-MS has recently become favoured as this derivatisation is not required. Gas/Liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry (G/LC-MS) is a method that combines the features of gas/liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry to isolate, identify and quantify different substances contained within a mixture. All chromatographic processes employ a stationary phase (SP) and a mobile phase (MP), which can be either a liquid or a gas. Components on a chromatographic plate/column are distributed between the MP and SP according to their relative attraction for each phase, referred to as their distribution ratio. Separation of a mixture into its constituent components enables the amount of each component to be quantified. Components of a mixture are carried through the SP by the flow of the MP; separations of the components are based on their different migration rates and so retention times through the analytical column. The extent of a components partitioning to either the SP or MP determines its migration rate and so retention time within the column. The longer the retention time of a component the slower its migration rate and the longer it takes to elute from the column. The analytical column is packed with SP, which consists of solid beads that are ideally spherical in shape and have a diameter of 3-10 m. There are two common types of column normal and reverse phase, normal phase has a polar SP which is most commonly silica and a non-polar MP such as hexane or CHCl 3. The retention of an analyte within a normal phase column is governed by the extent of interactions between the active hydroxyl groups on the silica with any polar functional groups of the analyte via electrostatic forces. A reverse phase column has a non-polar SP usually of an alkyl chain chemically bonded onto a solid support most commonly silica, and a polar MP such as MeOH or H 2O.  FORMULA  The major difference between GC and LC is that GC uses a gas as the MP and in LC the MP is a liquid, in GC the MP is a carrier gas either in the form of dry N 2 or O 2, which is supplied from gas cylinders and flows through the column at a constant rate. In LC the sample travels in the MP as a liquid, the MP is forced through the column as otherwise the flow rate would be too slow and this is why this technique is usually known as high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). The MP is provided by solvent reservoirs and its composition differs depending on what is being analysed. The major differences between HPLC and the chromatography used within LC-MS analysis are firstly that the diameter of the analytical column is much smaller, which also leads to the flow rate within the column needing to be much slower. A standard diameter used for a column in HPLC analysis is 4.6mm, whereas in LC-MS capillary columns as small as 74m have recently started to be used. Due to this thinness in diameter and so slow flow rate, which can be only 100nL/min through some columns, nanospray sources have started to be used in conjunction with these. Nanospray sources result in electrospray ionisation a technique that produces ions, it is particularly useful when analysing macromolecules such as drugs as it overcomes the tendency of these substances to fragment when ionised. During electrospray ionisation a liquid is forced through a very small charged capillary, which is usually metal. This liquid contains the sample being analysed dissolved in a large amount of volatile solvent; other volatile substances are often added to the solution as well. The analyte exists as an ion and as like charges repel the liquid pushes itself out of the capillary and forms a mist of small droplets about 10m across. A neutral carrier gas such as N 2 is occasionally used to turn the liquid into a fine spray and to help evaporate the neutral solvent. As the small droplets evaporate the charged analyte molecules suspended in the air are forced closer together, making them unstable causing them to once again break up. The process repeats until the analyte is free of solvent and is a lone ion, which can then enter the mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry is a type of detection system that produces an electrical output that is directly related to the concentration of analytes eluting from the column. As the different components of the sample elute from the chromatograph at different times it allows the mass spectrometer to analyse and identify them individually. The mass spectrometer achieves this by firstly vaporising and ionising the sample inside an ionisation chamber. Ionisation occurs via bombardment with a stream of high-energy electrons, produced from an electrically heated tungsten or rhenium filament. The impact of the electrons with the vaporised sample molecules causes an ejection of one or more electrons from the analyte forming radical cations (molecular ion). Immediately after this ionisation the radical cations are accelerated into a mass analyser using a series of electronic lenses to increase their kinetic energy. The most intense signals in a spectrum are formed from the most stable fragments, which often corresponds to the breakage of the weakest bonds. The concentration of the components within a sample of a motorists blood some of which may be drugs can be determined by construction of a calibration graph, this is produced by running six standards of known concentrations of a specific substance e.g cannabis, through the GC/LC-MS and plotting a graph of the MS detector responses, the concentation of the substance in the motorist's blood can then be determined by reading off the graph. When used together GC/LC and MS are far more accurate when identifying substances such as drugs compared to either part when used seperatly. MS normally requires a very pure sample, and occasionally two different samples may have very similar ioisation fragments and so produce similar mass spectra. GC and LC can be easily confused by different substances having the same retention time. But combining these two processes dramatically decreases the likelihood that two different molecules will behave in the same way. This means that when an expected mass spectrum is produced at a charcteristic retention time for a substance during GC/LC-MS analysis, it can usually be taken as proof of its presence in the sample. This is a neccessity when analysisng a suspected motorists blood sample for drugs as the results may have serious consequences as the penalties for driving whilst under the influence of drugs are the same as that for drink driving and the offence will be put on individulas criminal record and could affect the rest of their lives. 