<abstract>Since the times of the early ancient Greeks, the state of the universe has puzzled humankind. It's only in the past century that we have begun to unravel this mystery, with solid evidence. This paper reviews the evidence which has led to why physicists think that the universe is expanding. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Firstly, it is important to clarify what is meant by the term 'Universe'; Physicists define the Universe as 'All matter, energy, and space that exists.'  <fnote>'Universe', Dictionary of Physics, 4th Ed. Oxford University Press </fnote>In the 1600's Sir Isaac Newton postulated the universal law of gravitation, one consequence of this theory was that all bodies, including stars, planets and galaxies, would attract each other, resulting in a Big Crunch! As this had not happened, no plausible explanation could be found and to counter this paradox it was posed that the universe must be infinite in space, and contain an infinite number of evenly distributed stars, to produce an over all gravitational balance. Early in the 1800's, Heinrich Olbers, a German philosopher, postulated if the universe was infinite, with an infinite numbers of evenly distributed stars, then surely there would be a constant amount of light reaching Earth from all directions, and so the night sky would be a bright as day! The fact it wasn't as bright as day implied that if the universe was static (which due to Newton's law of gravitation it was thought so), it must be finite, which contradicts that law. Again at the start of the 20 th century, when Albert Einstein was formulating his general theory of relativity, his equations lead to a universe that is expanding or collapsing. Einstein ignored this and attempted to solve this paradox with the introduction of the cosmological constant, this was an antigravity force that stopped the universe collapsing under gravity. The cosmological constant would later become known as Einstein's biggest blunder. <heading>A New Truth</heading>It was also at this time, that larger telescopes were being made, between 1912 and 1922; Vesto Slipher took measurements of the spectra of large abundance of faint objects, which would later be found to be galaxies. Also it was observed that the spectra of all these objects were slightly red-shifted. In 1922 Russian Physicist, Alexander Friedmann made two simple assumptions; the universe looked the same in all directions, and it looked like this from any point. These assumptions are not strictly true, but the universe does look more or less the same in all directions. From these two statements alone Friedmann showed that universe should not be static, and even predicted what Hubble found several years earlier. In 1924 Edwin Hubble, an American astronomer, opened our eyes and showed us our galaxy was not alone. It was in the years after this that Hubble took many measurements of these galaxies, measuring the shift in the spectra of galaxies, which is known as the Doppler Effect; For objects that emit waves, in this case light from stars, when the object is in a frame of movement it receives light at a higher or lower frequency, depending on which way it moves (See Figure 1). <figure/>Using the spectra-shift data of these galaxies, Hubble calculated their speeds and found that most galaxies were receding from us. Hubble plotted the recessional speed of these galaxies against the distance from us, he found a direct linear relationship, which we now know as Hubble's Law, expressed by;  FORMULA  where H 0 is the Hubble constant, v is the recessional speed of a galaxy, and r is the Earth-galaxy distance. This may seem to suggest that the Earth is at the centre of the universe, but Friedmann's assumptions suggest that all galaxies are moving apart, there is no real evidence for this, and it is more on the grounds of human modesty. Hubble concluded if all galaxies are moving apart the universe must be expanding. It was also proposed that if the universe was expanding, then it must have been smaller at the previous point, which presented the notion of the Big Bang theory. In this Big Bang model, there must have been a massive emission of energy as the universe expanded and surely some of this energy must still be present. In 1963 two American physicists working at Bell Telephone Laboratories, accidentally came upon a relic from the universe's early beginnings. They found a microwave noise in their instruments that was constant in all directions, day and night, and at different times of the year, this meant that the radiation was constant at different positions in the solar system, from this they concluded that the noise must be coming outside our galaxy. Their conclusion seemed to be correct, the temperature of this radiation accurately corresponded with the one predicted by the Big Bang model with the current rate of expansion. This was a temperature of 2.7K, but if this radiation had a constant temperature it would present problems for the clustering of matter, there should be small fluctuations in this radiation. This radiation was named cosmic microwave background radiation, CMBR. A satellite was launched in the 1989 to collect data on the CMBR, and analysis of this data in 1992 showed there were small variations in its temperature. These variations correspond to the clustering of matter in the universe. <heading>Summary</heading>After a series of paradoxical arguments, since the beginnings of modern science, the Expanding Universe Theory does seem to be well supported by the evidence produced since the 1920's. Most important of this evidence is Hubble's law, and the correspondence of CMBR, in the Big Bang model. Although it is important to note that we are trying to predict ideas based on two massive extrapolations; we can only base our understanding on the part of the universe that is visible to us, and we only have a very small time scale to judge on i.e. we have only been observing the stars for around four millennia, the universe is estimated to have been around for 15 million millennia! 