<abstract>Dark matter is believed to be present due to discrepancies in astronomical observation; one of these discrepancies means dark matter is crucial in determining the fate of the universe. This paper will review the believed types of dark matter and how it will play an overall role in the universe's fate. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Dark matter or missing mass, as it's often known, is matter that cannot be detected by observing the electromagnetic radiation. As it is not directly detectable this makes its quantities very difficult to measure. Dark matter is believed to be present due to the three main discrepancies in astronomical observations. The first of these discrepancies is the rotation of the galaxies around the Milky Way, they appear to be rotating much faster than the visible matter would suggest. This additional velocity is believed to be due to the presence of dark matter. Some Physicists estimate as much as 90 per cent of the matter in a typical galaxy is 'dark'. The second of these discrepancies is related to clusters of galaxies, this has posed that in order to keep these galaxies gravitationally bound into these massive groups there must be large quantities of dark matter present. More recently "the Hubble Space Telescope hinted at an inverse relationship between dark and normal matter, with the smallest, faintest galaxies having the motions that indicated the presence of the greatest amount of dark matter." The third discrepancy is in the inflammatory model of the universe, which suggests that dark matter must be present for the inflammatory period to occur. This third discrepancy will be discussed more closely, later in this paper. <fnote>'Dark Matter' MS Encarta ED. 2004 </fnote><heading>Types of Dark Matter</heading>The types of dark matter can be broken done into two basic categories, baryonic dark matter and non-baryonic dark matter. Baryonic dark matter is made from protons, neutrons and electrons, but fails to emit radiation that is detectable here on Earth. MAssive Compact Halo Objects or MACHO's are the main type of Baryonic dark matter that is believed to be present. Macho's include brown dwarfs whose mass is between that of a large planet and a small star. They emit very weak EM radiation and so it is believed that this radiation may often be two difficult to detect here on Earth. Black holes are another type of Macho that have a very large mass, but due to their extreme gravitation pull, light cannot escape and so they are difficult to detect. Due to there reasonably large size all Macho's can potentially be detected using a technique called 'gravitational lensing'. Einstein's general theory of relativity states that space-time is warped by mass, and so light passing through this warped area is bent. The bending of light from brighter objects can thus be used to detect Macho's. Non-baryonic dark matter can be broken down into two 'flavours' types, hot dark matter, and cold dark matter. Hot dark matter is made from tiny particles, which are moving close to the speed of light, neutrinos are the most common example of these. Neutrinos were believed to have zero mass, but recent experiments have shown they may have some mass, in the region of a thousandth to a millionth that of an electron. However, due to the matter-antimatter annihilation that occurred after the big bang, the universe should be swarming with them. Cold dark matter comes in the form of Weak Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMP's. One particle speculated to be of this type, is the photino, the partner to the photon, this is believed to have a mass between 10 to 100 times that of a proton. However, to date no WIMP's have been detected in space or particle accelerators. <heading>A Dark Role in Our Fate</heading>The evolution of the universe depends is dependent on two factors. The first of these is the rate of expansion, which can be predicted to within 5-10 per cent accuracy, using Hubble's law and Doppler shift of galaxies. The second of these is the density of the universe; this is much harder to measure due to the non-luminous properties of dark matter. The quantities of dark matter will ultimately determine our fate, of which there are three possible out comes. <figure/>In the 1920's Alexander Friedmann, a Russian physicist, looked and Einstein's general theory of relativity and took a different view, he postulated that the original equations gave rise to a universe that was expanding or contracting, and that Einstein's cosmological constant was not valid. From this he created three models that could explain the possible fates of the universe. To understand this model more clearly, the introduction of the critical value is required, this is the density required to create a 'flat' universe, which is a universe that becomes ever more static as time continues, but never actually stopping. These models can be seen in Fig.1 The period of acceleration required for certain conditions to of occurred in the inflammatory period, which is believed to have happened in the first 10 -35s -10 -33s. This period means that with current rate of expansion observed, we should find a density of 1 part in 10 million of the critical value. This is a mean density of "2x10 -29 grams of matter per cubic centimetre of space". This value has two important implications; it puts us extremely close to the boundary for the open/closed universe, so close in fact that we cannot realistically measure it. <fnote>Certain conditions refer to the time required to eliminate the possibility of magnetic monopoles. </fnote><fnote>'The origin of the universe' , JD Barrow, Orion Books, p69 </fnote>The second implication is that the observed 'luminous' matter is out by a factor of 10 of this value. So for the inflammatory model to be correct we require 9/10 th's of the universes' matter to be dark! In order to predict what happened in the first few minutes of the universe it is fundamental understand what nuclear reactions took place, from current observations it seems that the matter required for this extra mass must be in non-baryonic form. More so if the three types of neutrinos are believed to have mass, then they would contribute to the density resulting in a value that would exceed the critical value. Also if WIMP's have a mass of just twice that of a hydrogen atom, their cumulative mass would give a density that would lead to a closed universe. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Physicists are unsure of its form and how much of it there is, but they are convinced that dark matter exists. It is mandatory to withhold present models of the universe intact. In the coming years, scientific research will hopefully reveal the truly dark mysteries of dark matter and ultimately determine our fate, whether it is open, closed or flat. 