Scientists believe that spider silk could as strong if not even stronger than steel and therefore could be used in things such as manufacturing. In this report I will be looking at whether this statement is correct and how the silk's properties affect it's strength and toughness. Spider silk is made up of complex protein molecules, in a chain of amino acids. These chains normally alternate between glycine and alanine that assemble into beta sheet formations; these "Ala rich" blocks are then separated by segments of much bulkier side group amino-acids. The amino acids form crystals, whilst the bulkier amino-acids give the spider silk an amorphous structure. It is a combination of the strong crystalline segments and elastic amorphous structure, which provide spider silk with it's properties. The silk is produced in glands on the spiders abdomen, there are up to seven glands to produce silk for different purposes, however no spider possesses all seven of these glands. Once the silk has been produced it is spun using pairs of spinners on the back of the spider's legs, a spider could have anything up to five pairs of spinners. The main purposes of spider silk would be to produce a spider web that has to be strong in order to catch prey, or a lighter silk that can float in the air enabling the spider to travel. The molecular mass of the protein within the spider glands is just 30 Dalton, however once it leaves the glands it polymerizes to a molecule named fibroin with a molecular mass of around 300 Dalton. This fibroin is remarkably strong and has a tensile strength (1.3 GPa) comparable to that of steel (1.65 GPa) even though it has less than a fifth of the density of steel. This means that on strength to weight basis, spider's silk is much stronger than steel and is in fact equally as strong as aromatic nylon filaments such as Kevlar. It has been suggested that a pencil thick strand of spider silk could stop a Boeing 747 in flight. However, spider silk is not the strongest substance known to man. Man made fibres called carbon nanotubes, are the only known substance that has yielded greater tensile strength for its weight. However, spider silk has some other properties that carbon nanotubes does not. Spider silk is extremely elastic and can stretch up to 150% of its original length without breaking, this means that along with it being very strong it is also very tough and therefore will not break under pressure. Its toughness is equal to that of commercially made polyaramid (aromatic nylon) filaments, which are the benchmark for modern polymer fiber technology. However, spider silk is also somehow inelastic, meaning that it absorbs the energy of incoming prey and therefore it is not simply bounced off. Another impressive property of spider silk is that it remains tough at low temperatures, and therefore people believe that it could become a possible lightweight replacement for carbon fiber and Kevlar. Scientists are now trying to produce spider silk in the quantities that would make it freely available for human usage. One such attempt to do this is to inject spider silk proteins into the milk production glands of sheep. When the milk is then produced, it contains spider's silk that is extremely strong. Scientists believe that spider silk could be applied to things such as, bulletproof clothing, ropes and biodegradable bottles. Spider silk is also compatible with the human body and therefore could be used to make strong artificial ligaments, in addition to repairing skin tissue. In conclusion spider silk is made up of complex protein molecules and chains of amino acids, which interact to provide it with its extraordinary properties. Spider silk is not quite as strong as steel, however on strength to weight basis it is up to five times as strong, and equally as strong as Kevlar. Spider silk is stronger than steel under pressure, as it is also extremely tough and elastic. However, it is not as strong as steel under compression. Due to all of these properties of spider silk, scientists are now trying to reproduce it on giant scales so that it can be used as a lightweight replacement of Kevlar and carbon fibre. <figure/><figure/><figure/>