"Most of the matter in the universe, is dark, so what makes scientists think that it exists and what could it be?" The mass of a galaxy can be predicted from its size and the amount of light that it gives off, however, astronomers' measurements about the mass of galaxies found by looking at their speed of rotation, show that the mass required in order for these galaxies to rotate at their current speed, would be ten to one hundred times more than we can see. Since this mass is not visible it is called dark matter. It is believed that "stars make up less than 1% of the universe's mass; all the loose gas and other forms of matter, less than 5%" (1), and the rest is made up of dark matter and dark energy, 25% of which is dark matter. However, nobody knows what dark matter actually is, even though there is much evidence for its existence. This is because it neither reacts with any known form of matter or emits any electromagnetic radiation, in fact the effect of dark matter can only be seen by its gravitational pull on visible matter. There are two different types of dark matter, hot dark matter and cold dark matter. Hot dark matter travels close to the speed of light and only makes 0.3% of the total mass of the universe; it is likely to be made up of neutrinos. Cold dark matter on the other hand is much more sluggish and makes up anything up to 25% of the total mass of the universe, however nobody knows for certain what cold matter is made up of. In this report, I will be concentrating on cold dark matter I will be looking at the numerous types of evidence for the existence of cold dark matter and what it could be. The existence of dark matter was first considered with the discovery that the stars in the sky are accelerating at a greater rate than would be expected for the amount of gravitational pull that occurs from other stars. Therefore scientists deduced that there must be some kind of matter between the stars that does not react with anything or emit electromagnetic radiation, however does provide the required mass to cause the gravitational pull in order for the stars too travel at their rate of acceleration. It is this gravitational pull factor of the dark matter that provides much more of its sources of evidence. It was then realised that the expected mass of the universe was much less than was actually predicted and therefore the idea of dark matter really kicked off. At the beginning of the universe, before the period of accelerated expansion, the whole universe was uniform with no clusters of mass. However, after the period of accelerated expansion, local irregularities had occurred due to the expansion rate being greater than the speed of light, meaning that matter at one end of the universe would not be able to interact with matter at the other end in order to stay within equilibrium. However, at this time in the lifespan of the universe its temperature was still far too great for the matter to cluster together, according to the amount of mass from the matter in the universe. This is because the high amounts of energy would simply force any matter to annihilate each other, forming smaller matter that could not be clustered together. Therefore, dark matter is needed in order to provide the extra mass that could cluster all of these high energy particles together and stop them from escaping. It is believed that only cold dark matter could have caused this clustering as it is much more sluggish than hot dark matter, and would therefore be better able to cluster things together quickly. It is this cold dark matter that is still causing galaxies to cluster together today. The presence of dark matter stabilises the formed galaxies and clusters of galaxies as they continue to collide, merge, and evolve, as quoted by Kaufmann and Freedman in their fifth edition of the book Universe: "The total mass of our galaxy is much more than the amount of visible mass. As for our galaxy, we conclude that; it must contain significant amounts of non-luminous dark matter. If this was not there, galaxies would have long ago dispersed in random directions and the clusters would no longer exist today" (2). This was discovered in the 1930s by two scientists named Zwicky and Smith, who looked at the individual galaxies making up two nearby galaxy clusters, called Coma and Virgo. They then calculated the velocity of these galaxies before deducing that the velocities were between a factor of ten and one hundred that of what they had expected. They knew that the only factor that causes a change in the velocity of a cluster of galaxies is the gravitational pull between all of the galaxies, and that the greater the velocity the greater the gravitational pull, and therefore mass must be. From this they realised that the clusters must have a much greater mass than expected and this must be made up from dark matter. Perhaps the strongest form of evidence for the existence of dark matter is the rotation curves of galaxies. Rotation curves of galaxies were first measured by people such as Rubin and Freeman in the 1970s. It had long been known that galaxies rotate around their centre much like the planets in our solar system and that they also obey Kepler's laws. Therefore, finding the rotation velocity of galaxies can enable you to measure the mass within that galaxy to a high accuracy. On the outside of galaxies there is much less light, meaning that there is much less mass concentrated in these regions. This would mean that these areas should rotate at a much lower rate, however this is not the case. This indicates that there must be a greater mass within each individual galaxy than previously expected. This experiment has been carried on many spiral galaxies including our own, and is the first evidence that dark matter exists within each individual galaxy. Further evidence of dark matter existing within individual galaxies has been revealed from x-ray observations of galaxies. These x-ray images show that clusters are filled with a very hot, low density gas that would easily leak away if it was not held by some strong gravitational pull, like that provided by the existence of dark matter. This dark matter can be seen from gamma ray emissions from within the galaxies. In this image courtesy of Yale University, the galaxies appear in red and orange whereas the halos of dark matter appear blue. "It appears, that dark matter lies within and immediately surrounding galaxies, not in the vast spaces between galaxies" (3). <figure/>Despite this resounding evidence for the existence of dark matter, some scientists are starting to believe that it may not actually exist, and that instead, a change in the laws of physics is needed. The reason for this theory is that as dark matter cannot be seen or measured, nobody actually knows what it is made up of, although there have been many predictions. It is already known that hot dark matter is likely to be made up of particles that can travel close to the speed of light, such as a non-zero mass neutrinos. In addition, it is also predicted that some of the uncalculated mass in the universe may be made up of matter such as low mass stars that don't emit enough light, brown dwarfs, which are failed stars, or larger planets and asteroids, such as Jupiter. None of these emit light and would therefore be considered as dark matter, however, there is by no means enough of these in the universe to explain the total effects of dark matter. This matter is collectively known as MACHOs, (Massive Astronomical Compact Halo Objects), and lives mostly in the halo of the galaxies. One thing that scientists are certain about is what dark matter can not be made up of. Firstly there is no way that dark matter can be made up of protons, neutrons, or anything that these join together to form, this is because at the beginning of the universe there simply wasn't enough of these to produce the required quantities of dark matter. Neither can dark matter be simply hidden within vast numbers of black holes or neutron stars, as a black hole large enough to hold the required amount of dark matter would produce and emit numerous x-rays that are easy to detect. A small fraction of dark matter may be formed from neutrinos, however not a great amount, as they are probably too lightweight to cause things such as galaxy clusters. Scientists believe that the answer to dark matter belongs in an unknown "exotic" particle called a WIMP. WIMP stands for Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, and it is predicted that for the mass density of the universe to be critical the vast majority of dark matter must be made of these non-baryonic particles. WIMPs are in fact very strong and can therefore travel through things easily. It is predicted that millions could be passing through your body this very second. One of the most commonly recognised theories about WIMPs, is that of supersymmetry. Supersymmetry explains how all known elementary particles have a "superpartner", which are much heavier and therefore more sluggish than the original particle. One such superpartner is the neutralino, the partner for a photon. The neutralino has a zero charge so is not affected by electromagnetic forces, and is also stable, meaning it won't decay into a smaller superparticle. From the big bang theory scientists can predict how many neutralinos were produced, and how many still existed after the beginning of the universe, due to annihilation during collisions. Based on the predicted number of neutralinos and their expected mass "the total mass in neutralinos almost exactly matches the inferred mass of dark matter in the universe. This correspondence is a strong sign that neutralinos are indeed dark matter" (4). Other undetected particles that have been suggested to exist include axions. Another possibility is that dark galaxies may exist; these galaxies are much smaller than our own and can not be detected, as they only include black and brown dwarfs. It is now the job of scientists to detect these possibilities of dark matter; numerous experiments are now underway to do just this. Although neutralinos do not interact with matter, there are so many of them that occasionally a neutralino will hit an atomic nucleus. When this occurs, the kinetic energy from the neutralino is transferred into the nucleus in the form of heat energy, and it is this that needs to be measured. These experiments most commonly take place underground, using large water canisters; this means that background cosmic rays which could affect the experiment are eliminated. In conclusion, after measurements were made to predict the mass of the universe, scientists discovered that the total mass was between a factor of 10 and 100 greater than that was estimated. This made scientists believe that there must be some kind of dark matter within the universe which cannot be seen as it neither interacts with matter, nor emits electromagnetic radiation; this was therefore known as dark matter. This dark matter can only be detected by its gravitational pull on normal matter. There are numerous types of evidence for the existence of dark matter. These include: the non-uniform structure of the universe, the clustering of galaxies, the rotational spirals of galaxies, the higher than expected acceleration rate of stars, and images from x-ray and gamma emissions. However, despite all of this evidence, nobody actually knows what dark matter is made of. Some is believed to be formed from neutrinos and MACHOs such as brown holes, however, the rest is believed to be made of unknown exotic particles called WIMPs. Due to none of these particles being discovered, some scientists are now starting to believe that dark matter may not actually exist and that the laws of science may have to be altered. The search for these particles is therefore becoming vital. 