<abstract><heading>Abstract </heading>Modern cosmologists and astronomers believe the universe has a mass, of which between 90% [ref.4.] and 99% [ref.5.] comes from something that is not visible (ie only between 1% and 10% of the mass of the universe is that of all the gas, planets, stars and galaxies that we know exist today). So if at least 90% of the universe's mass is effectively invisible, how do we really know it exists? This paper looks at why modern cosmology believes there is something else forming the vast majority of the mass of the universe, and what this 'something' actually is. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>What is dark matter and what could it be? This is just one of the many questions that scientists associated with all astronomical forms have wrestled with for several decades, but have not yet come up with a conclusion that is one hundred per cent correct and justified. After all, the world of cosmology revolves around many theories that as of yet, have not been proved. The origins of this dark matter theory can be traced back to the early 1930's, where astronomers Jan Oort (Dutch) and Fritz Zwicky (Swiss-American) independently proposed the theory of dark matter [ref.6.]. The proposals were made by making observations of the motion of various visible stars in the outer layer of our Milky Way galaxy, and also through observations of the rotational motion of galaxies that are part of a cluster of galaxies, bound together by gravity. What these two astronomers saw was that the observed stars and galaxies were moving with a velocity great enough to overcome the force of gravity, and become separated from the system it was bound to [ref.6.]. However, the observed stars and galaxies had clearly been stable parts of the system that they were bound to, for the vast majority of the time the known universe has exited for. So why hadn't the stars and galaxies become separated and been flung off into another part of space? There must have been something there to contribute to the gravity needed to keep the stars and galaxies gravitationally bound to their system. It was suggested that this 'something' was a type of matter that we could not visibly see, a dark matter. <heading>What is this dark matter made of? </heading>Suggested explanations for what dark matter consists of have an extremely high range. For example, astronomers believe dark matter consists of objects with a size ranging from small stars to supermassive black holes [ref.1], while particle physicists believe dark matter is made up of subatomic particles that have a mass of the order of 10 5 times smaller than that of an electron [ref.4.]. These are the two main suggested possibilities for the constituents of dark matter. The astronomer's view labels dark matter as being baryonic objects, made of ordinary matter, that emits very little or no radiation. These objects come in the form of white dwarfs, black holes, stars with a low mass or brown dwarfs (which do not have a large enough mass for the reactions which make the star shine to occur). These types of baryonic objects are referred to as Massive Astrophysical Compact Halo Objects, or MACHOs for short. The particle physicist's view refers to non-baryonic particles, known as Weakly Interactive Massive Particles (WIMPs). They are subatomic particles that are thought to interact only gravitationally with baryonic matter, i.e. they pass straight through ordinary matter. The most promising contenders for these subatomic particles are the axion, the light neutrino and the lightest stable particle (LSP) [ref.7.]. <heading>How has dark matter been detected? </heading>The only ways to view an object is to either observe it directly, or to see what kind of effect it has on other objects. As it is not possible to directly look at dark matter, it is rather difficult to determine where it is actually located. One way dark matter in the universe is explored is via a technique called weak gravitational lensing [ref.8.]. As Einstein proved in 1919, gravity bends rays of light. For example, during a total eclipse, the sun's gravity bends light from a star positioned behind the sun, so that the star is visible. This technique is used to determine where MACHOs are located. <figure/>Another way of determining the existence of MACHOs is to look at the effects of black holes on surrounding objects. Of course you can't directly observe a black hole as its gravity strength is so intense that nothing, not even light can escape it, therefore you can't see it. However by studying the objects that appear to be orbiting nothing, the evidence for the existence of black holes, and hence MACHOs is reinforced. On the other hand, the difficulty level of detecting WIMPs is much greater. We know that these subatomic particles pass through ordinary matter, but theory states that on an extremely rare occasion, an interaction between one of these particles and a solid object will take place. Since it is not possible to observe the effects of WIMPs on surrounding objects, the only way to detect a WIMP is simply to witness one. But how can you witness a WIMP if you cant actually see it? Experiments for detecting WIMPs are currently underway but as of yet, there are no established results. The process of detecting a WIMP is quite simple. When an object's temperature is reduced to that of around absolute zero, the atoms that form that object have a motion that is almost completely restricted. Present experiments consist of objects cooled to a temperature very close to absolute zero, so that if the rarity occurs that a WIMP interacts with one of these atoms, the system will record it as a bit of heat energy [ref.4.]. <heading>So which is it to be? </heading>Although both astronomers and particle physicists have strong views on what they believe dark matter consists of, the truth is we don't actually know. Because of the difficulty of detecting such WIMPs is so great, and the fact that WIMPs have such a small mass, astronomers are sceptical that they really exist. On the other hand, due to the basic fact that not enough MACHOs have been detected, it is believed that MACHOs alone cannot account for all the missing mass [ref.4.]. This results in the conclusion that dark matter is made up of both baryonic and non-baryonic objects (ie both MACHOs and WIMPs contribute to the unknown mass. <heading>Effect on the universe</heading>The discovery that the universe is expanding has been one of the greatest landmarks in scientific history, but what we don't know is if it will expand forever. There are three possible definitive solutions for the universe, that will each give a different eventual destiny for the universe: An open universe, a flat universe and a closed universe. An open universe states that the universe will expand forever. A flat universe states that the universe will also expand forever, however the expansion rate will decrease to, but never reach zero. The expansion rate will always be greater than the critical expansion rate (ie the rate above which the universe will not contract under the influence of gravity). Finally a closed universe states that the universe will continue to expand but then collapse under the influence of gravity, resulting in what is known as the Big Crunch [ref.11.]. The idea of dark matter is a fundamental concept in determining the future of the universe. The more dark matter there is, the greater mass the universe has, and therefore there is more gravitational force acting 'on' the universe. Depending on the mass of this dark matter, we could live in either one of the three universe models but at this present time, the ultimate fate of the universe is unknown. 