<heading>Introduction</heading>Over the course of this project so far I have learnt a good deal, and have actually found it an enjoyable task to take on. What has made it the most interesting to me and taught me the most is that I was elected Project Manager of my team and henceforth had to take on all the responsibilities associated with the position. In this report I shall summarize what I have learnt about software engineering, team work and a critique of how my team operated. <heading>What I have learnt</heading><heading>Software Engineering:</heading>The theoretical knowledge I was going to get from performing this project was never going to be great on the basis of already having taken a course in the subject. But in my humble opinion, the theoretical side of software engineering is useless until you apply it to actually developing a project. In the practical sense of software engineering, I have learnt a great deal. I had never worked in a team greater than two people previously, let alone led a team of five. It has led me to have a greater appreciation of several of the tenants of SE, namely structured methodology, risk assessment and centralization. The methodology with which we seemed to develop the project has been very much based on the old Rapid Application Development - completely self emergent structure, and things falling into place as and when they do. As the second term progressed we fell into a more structured form, with regular, minuted meetings based on project plans and critical pathways being acknowledged. I can now see how this is far better when you have an inexperienced (and largely unmotivated) team, and will certainly go straight for a structured methodology next time I am in control of a team. I had never had to perform a risk assessment for any past projects and so this was an interesting practise. It struck me at first as being a downright waste of time on a project like this then a few weeks before the end of this term it struck me that this project might overrun into, or near the exam period. This was actually a risk that concerned me, and that had a reasonable likelihood of occurring. It was, I realized, not until I noticed this could happen that I understood the project absolutely had to be completed by then and tweaked the project plan to make sure it was. I can now see how this scales up to larger projects where it would be important to acknowledge and be wary of potential problems. <heading>Team Work:</heading>Most of what I have learnt about how to run a team better will be summed up in the Critique of Team Biological Intelligence, but there is still a lot I can say here. There were some things about running this team that I just learnt slowly, picking up bit by bit along the way - how to motivate them better, how to deal with absenteeism and failure to hand in work, the importance of easy communications and efficient use of resources. Then there were some things I learnt quickly - like I didn't want to find myself on the last day still waiting to receive vital bits of work of people, or have to grade people off hand, without discussing grading with them previously. These were the two most important and hard learned lessons. It wasent of course, until I'd experienced the two things I just mentioned that I stepped into gear and decided that next term I was going to run things differently. There were going to be accepted and hard coded rules of discipline, there were going to be regular meetings throughout the term. Work was not going to be rushed off at the last minute; it was going to be handed in, in advance. And fundamentally I learnt, that if you want something done properly, do it yourself. But I was also determined to find out how to get other people to do it as near perfectly as possible. <heading>A Critique of Team Biological Intelligence</heading>The first thing that was really setup in term two was that there were going to be two weekly meetings during which we would discuss progress and develop new ideas. At first we used both of them to the full, with them both sometimes extending to two hours each, as we got further in and our individual tasks took up more of our time, the meetings became briefer and more just progress reporting. Either way - they were fundamental to our progress this term. On occasions though it was necessary to rearrange the meeting times though which initially led to confusion when communication was largely done by word of mouth and e-mail. I learnt that some people don't actually check there e-mail the moment they wake up, go to bed and every five minutes in-between, and I had to adapt to use telephones - this made things easier. Everyone's numbers were quickly gathered and shared out - another thing which will in future be done on day one. With this done it was possible to negotiate too rearrange meeting times so that people could get vital bits of work done before the meeting, get prepared and ensure everyone turned up. It still didn't happen all the time though, and that's where the second big problem turned up. I didn't want to have to just chop peoples grades down without giving them a chance to discuss it with me, I had felt guilty enough doing this the last time and at that point the amount of work done by the team was negligible. A better system needed to be found. I decided that establishing a few disciplinary rules would be the fairest way to do it - if people consistently missed meetings or didn't hand in work then they would be moved down a grade, then it would all be discussed at the end. This took that weight of my back - I have no intention of making enemies because someone had a different idea too me, as to the amount of work needing doing. Another similar problem that I encountered was how to tell someone that I didn't like their idea and that it wasent going to get used. The necessity to do this occurred on a few occasions. I found that discussing it with other team members, establishing that the idea wasn't feasible for whatever reason was the best and fairest first step and then the next required a unique solution so as not to offend the person. Sometimes I found it possible to simply step around the idea, move on quickly, and then return to that area of the problem later. At other times I found it just had to be stated bluntly that I didn't like the idea, for whatever reason. Motivating the team was an interesting problem - how to encourage a group of first year students that instead of going down the pub, they should get together and discuss building a board game? I found out, that the more often they could be brought to think about it, then the easier and quicker they would come up with decent and original ideas. As soon as the flood gate had begun to leak then it became a lot easier to get more and more out of it. Once everyone had their - own- idea integrated into the project, and they could see if all coming together, it got a lot easier to request more of their time. Once they realized we were ahead of the great majority of teams, and stood a chance of winning, and then the bird was in the hand. These were all things that we did manage to get solved on the whole though. There are still lots of areas that are greatly lacking, some for lack of resources, some because they should have been done earlier in the project and some I just hadn't used. The team for instance, is still not being used anywhere near its maximum efficiency - if every meeting, I could issue a task to every person and have it complete by the next meeting the project would progress much faster. But on many occasions its hard to break down the project into such small pieces without far greater planning and foresight. Greater use of the project plan would make it a lot easier to do, and is one thing I certainly intend to do next time around. If I had ensure that everything along the critical path always ticked along in time, and that all tasks without precursors were done early on, then the project would have been easy come, easy go. Next time around I think I will setup the disciplinary procedures right from the start - but also making allowances for reward procedures. I think it terms of this project it would be fair to establish that everyone starts at a C, then through attendance of all/few meetings and making large/small contributions can move up or down, then the project would be a lot fairer. As is I feel everyone simply expects to be given an A for simply being a member of the team - something I begrudge and then I have no way to reward the team members who have put a lot in. I will also try and centralize all team documents next time around, and keep them regularly updated. Assigning one single person to do this from the start will probably be the best way to do this. During this project I often found that someone would end up requesting a document off me, I would then need to receive the request, send them the document etc, causing great disturbance to whatever work they were doing at that point. One final thing that I would try to do differently next time is provide better meeting plans. Frequently we have had meetings, turned up, sat down, and then almost randomly picked what we're going to discuss that day. A more efficient planning approach would work a lot better, especially so if the schedule was e-mailed around in advance and people asked to prepare for each meetings. 