<heading>Question 1 You are leader of a project to develop a new software program for your client that involves a team around you of three people, about 20 weeks work and a cost of £ 100,000 to the customer, and it needs to work by 28 February 2006. Do a 'contingency analysis' on it. What could you do to wreck it? Then turn it round and provide five important things to do to make it successful!Answer</heading>The project could be wrecked in a variety of ways. The software could not be what the user is expecting or requiring or the project may eventually cost more than the client is willing to spend. The software may not work at all, or may not be compatible with the client's current systems. The client or their staff may not be able to understand it. To reduce the risk of this happening: <list>With close consultation with the client, draw up a detailed set of functional and non-functional project requirements. These should each be needed by the client, and deemed feasible by us. These should be signed by both parties.Create a cost forecast based on the estimated complexity of the project and endeavour to stick to it. The client should also agree this before the project is underway.Perform rigorous testing on the software before releasing it, and on location.Discuss the hardware and software that is to run in conjunction with the project before it is designed.Write a manual explaining how to use, install and troubleshoot the software, and supply ongoing support to the client once it is deployed.</list><heading>Question 2 What issues may arise if a company uses consultants that are unethical? Identify two issues. Explain what the issue is and why it relates to the ethical behaviour of the consultant. For each issue suggest one thing a company could do to reduce the risk of it occurring. Answer</heading><heading>First issue:</heading>If the same consultancy firm were working on the behalf of two competing firms, there may be a conflict of interest. They may give bad advice, which would work to the advantage of another company, or they may not be discrete with information they learn about your company's performance, which could damage share prices. From the point of view of the consultant, this is extremely unethical behaviour as it is almost impossible to work to the mutual interest of two competing employers. The best strategy would be to choose a consultancy firm with a good reputation, preferably one that publishes its client lists. <heading>Second issue:</heading>If a consultancy firm has a low standard of ethics on issues such as human rights, they may advise strongly to exploit cheap workforce from countries with very low standards of pay and conditions. The consultancy company may imply that this is the only real path to take in the current economy, or may even conceal the true nature of the businesses you are doing business with. It is therefore prudent to check on any businesses that you employ to ensure that they do not violate human rights, or pass your trade onto another company that does. <heading>Question 3 How would the postal rule affect contemporary technological methods of communicating acceptance (e.g. email, webpage click-wraps, SMS)? Answer</heading>As defined by Adams v Lindsell (1818) and Household Fire Insurance Co v Grant (1879), the postal rule states that acceptance is complete as soon as a letter of acceptance, if properly addressed and stamped, has been posted. This does not apply to instantaneous communications, such as oral, telephone and fax. The grey area is the application of the postal rule to email, which could be argued to be non-instantaneous. There are numerous potential problems here. The main problem is the lack of a single organisation to deal with the communication. A letter is handled by the Postal Service, but an email may go through the servers of many companies. If the email is lost on the way, whose responsibility is it? Also, what happens if the email is encrypted and unreadable, or if it bounces from the recipient's account due to lack of space? As the Electronic Commerce Regulations 2002 concentrates on receipt of orders, and says little about entering into agreements, it is of limited use here. We really need to re-examine the law and decide on a definitive decision about how the postal rule applies to modern communication methods. <heading>Question 4 Assume that you are a senior person in a high-technology industrial research organisation. Your management has expressed concern about the effect of "disruptive technologies" on the business. How would you define a strategy for the technical community to recognise and inform the company about potential "disruptive technologies" that are likely to affect the business, either as a threat or as an opportunity? Note that a "disruptive technology" is one that will radically transform a market, create a wholly new market, or destroy an existing market. Answer</heading>The technical research community should always be on the lookout for new technologies. Some of these will change the market in a drastic way, and others may close the market on existing products. If handled badly, either of these could have a severely negative effect on the company. The key here is to find the technology fast. It is best to employ people not only to research into new areas, but also to find what is being researched elsewhere. It is also useful to look into more 'off the wall' ideas, so the areas people look into don't become stagnant and unimaginative. Employees could anomalously post these ideas into a box, and they could be read by a team once a week and investigated if appropriate. If a new disruptive technology is found with enough warning, there will be time for consultation and debates between management and the technical teams into how the company can best meet this challenge. The company may decide to begin moving one of its existing markets in another direction, or it may decide to create a new market to get a head start on the competition. <heading>Question 5 Part 1: What sort of people challenges would you face when introducing a new quality process in a large well-established organisation with processes in place already? Part 2: How would you go about implementing these changes?Answer</heading><heading>Part 1:</heading>The main problem with quality control processes is that technical people often don't appreciate their relevance. If implemented wrongly, they can inject an air of distrust into the workplace, or create the feeling that management knows more about technical processes than the technicians. This can lower morale, which can seriously lower productivity and work quality. People become less motivated, and less inclined to ensure that their work is the best they can do. The other issue, depending on the type of quality control process that is being implemented, and how negative the feeling is, the is that employees may spend time finding ways round an obstructive process rather than complying to it. <heading>Part 2:</heading>The best way to avoid the above is not to thrust the quality control process upon the workforce as if from a great height, but to make them feel part of the process. I would organise a joint meeting between management and the technical employees to discuss possible quality control processes, and how they would work. During this meeting, lots of ideas can be floated, and only those ideas that seem to be generally regarded as beneficial and feasible will be taken forward into more detailed planning. <heading>Question 6 You are asked to prepare a brief report for your fellow company directors on a competitor company. Using the Internet as a resource, examine any PLC company of your choice; prepare a report that includes a minimum of five key indicators, explaining the significance of each indicator and why you have chosen it. Answer</heading>Whittard of Chelsea is primarily a retailer of tea and of coffee. It also owns the majority of Barney Holdings. The tea market in the UK in 2001 was worth £523.6 million, with 72% of the population regularly drinking tea with an estimated 163 million cups being drunk per day. The problem is that by 2005, this market has declined by some 12%. Coffee is the second most valuable legally traded commodity on Earth, after oil. The demand in the UK has decreased from 2.25KG per person in 1995 to 2.19KG per person in 2001. This is obviously a very difficult time for a company in the tea and coffee trade. Whittard has done surprisingly well through most of this period, increasing the value of its shares on the London Stock Exchange from 30p in 2001 up to over 200p in 2004. More recently, however, it has slumped to around 74p. Things may be turning around now, however, as the Icelandic retailer Baugur, which owns Oasis, Coast and Goldsmiths, has bought Whittard for £21.5m. Baugur plans to merge Whittard with the health store operator Julian Graves, buy Whittard shares for 90p, and make it into a private company. 