<heading>Introduction</heading>The manufacture of the chain-mail with which Roman soldiers were equipped is believed to have involved the process of wire drawing. Although it is known that non-ferrous metals such as copper could easily be drawn using the simple instruments of the die-plate and the human strength (to draw wire), wire drawing of ferrous metals such as iron in this way is not possible and becomes a more complicated task owing to the greater forces required in drawing the wire. Experiments have shown that the forces required in drawing iron wire are in the region of 1.4 to 2.1 kN. <fnote>Article by Dr David Sim (reprinted from Britannia Vol. XXVIII 1997) </fnote>Although there is no definite knowledge with regards to the method used in the manufacture of the open ring components of the chain-mail, there is some evidence that iron wire may have been drawn using iron plates. This theory would suggest that the required forces are produced using some system benefiting from mechanical advantage. It is therefore the object of this report to propose a possible mechanical means by which the ancient Romans may have drawn iron wire, subject to the available technology of that period. <heading>Historical wire drawing</heading>There is no consensus on when wire drawing through drawplates was developed. Current evidence suggest that it may have been new technology in 1300's, although wire used for jewelry predating this period bears the distinctive marks of drawn metal rather than the hammered wire often used in ancient mail. There is currently much controversy as to whether the ancient armourer was familiar with wire drawing techniques. One view is that wire was made by drawing a forged iron rod through successively smaller holes until the required diameter of wire for making rings is obtained. Another view is that wire was cut from thin sheets then filed, scraped and hammered into the required size. While another view is that wire drawing may have involved a combination of these methods, where a strip of iron is cut from a sheet and subsequently drawn through smaller holes until the required diameter is obtained. <heading>The general principle (or solution) </heading>The problem of drawing iron wire is related to force and the production of sufficient leverage to enable this process. There are various means of achieving this force by benefiting from mechanical advantage. Roman technology made extensive use of wheels and mechanical pulley systems. The mechanics of such systems would easily enable the production of the required forces. In accordance with this concept a wheel will be incorporated to produce the required leverage, with its radius as the variable. The solution will implement simple mechanical principles to produce the required leverage: 1. Basic problem: <figure/>2. The requirement of a holding and gripping mechanism: <figure/>3. The production of the required force using a wheel to translate torque into horizontal drawing force. The magnitude of the force is proportional to the distance x of the lever: <figure/><heading>Methods for mitigating forces</heading>Should the required forces necessitate impractical dimensions for the wheel and lever mechanism, there are 3 possible ways to overcome the problem: <heading>The drawing of wire in two stages</heading>The forces involved in drawing wire from an initial diameter of 3 mm to a final diameter of 1 mm are palpably greater than, for instance, drawing wire from a diameter of 3 mm to that of 2 mm. Based on this observation the wire can be drawn in two stages; first using a 2 mm (hole) draw-plate and then using a 1 mm draw plate. <heading>The use of two levers</heading>The use of an extra lever positioned on the opposite side of the wheel system can be incorporated to allow double the amount of manual work produced. <heading>The use of a furnace to heat wire</heading>A furnace can be utilized to heat the iron wire increasing its malleability and workability thus aiding the drawing process. Since the heated wire facilitates the drawing process, less force is needed to deform the iron as a result. Each of the described methods has its advantages and disadvantages. While the advantages are obvious, the disadvantages need further explanation. The first method of drawing wire in multiple stages has the obvious drawback that the process will take twice the amount of time. The second method poses the disadvantage that an extra human operator is required. The third method of using a furnace entails the necessary set up and use of resources to produce a fire. This is not ideal particularly in instances where the machine is only briefly required. With the exception of the third then, these methods are incorporated into our solution. The possible methods of overcoming the problem of force and dimensions as suggested above are simple solutions that do not involve technological complexity. The methods suggested are within the capacity of Roman technology and it is known that two of these methods may have been used in some form or another. The first method of drawing wire in two or more stages is modern day standard practice and there is no reason to believe that Roman technologists did not also conceive of this idea. The second method of using extra human strength to produce the required leverage is simply a matter of common sense. The third method of heating metal before working it is known to have been used by Roman blacksmiths extensively. Indeed it forms the very basis of the concept of forging, a craft which predates the Romans. <heading>Drawings</heading>Having established the basic design details a detailed illustration of the system can be made. Components of the system such as the rail, wire carriage-clamp and draw-plate require separate illustration and these are also included: <figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><heading>Function and feasibility </heading>The function of the wire drawing machine is simple, requiring only the turning of the wheel by two human operators in a clockwise and anti-clockwise motion respectively. The ropes which are connected to the shaft of the drum translate the rotary motion of the drum into uniaxial horizontal motion. The ropes are in turn connected to the wire-carriage which is clamped to the wire to be drawn. As the drum is turned the torque produced exerts a tensile force onto the ropes therefore pulling the carriage and drawing the iron wire through the die. Before operating the wheel however, the wire must first be filed to a certain length (determined by the dimensions of the system components) then placed through the guiding tube on which it rests and then threaded first through the draw-plate and finally into the clap. The nature of the clamp enables wire to feed through once drawn (and unclamped) without the need to remove it from the machine. This therefore allows for the drawing of unlimited lengths of wire. The production of the required force of 2.0 kN is determined as follows: <figure/> FORMULA  Since drawing will be in two stages then required force to draw from 3mm to 2mm and from 2mm to 1mm is half of the required force of 2.0 kN to draw directly from 3mm to 1mm. Therefore f = 1.0 kN. Also, since two operators will contribute force at, say, a reasonable magnitude of 250 N (25 kg) each, then F = 500 N. From this we can derive the relationship between the drum radius r and the lever arm length d, thus:  FORMULA  This therefore indicates that, for the given forces, the lever arm length must be twice the radius of the drum shaft for the iron wire to draw successfully through the die. <heading>Materials and manufacture</heading>The design of the wire drawing machine is made in the context of Roman engineering and with attention to the available materials and manufacturing methods during the Roman period. The drawing machine can be constructed from a combination of typical Roman materials such as wood, iron, concrete and stone. The drum and shaft system is conventionally constructed from wood although the supporting struts can be made from concrete or stone. Since the wire carriage-clamp unit is subjected to high tensile and compressive (clamp) forces then this is more appropriately fabricated from iron. The rail however can be made from either wood, concrete or stone, although iron would be a more complicated (as well as expensive) option to use for this purpose. However, if the other materials are used then these can incorporate iron by using a thin iron sheet to line especially those areas which form the tracks for the carriage wheels (see below). In fact this would be advantageous as an iron surface will cause little frictional forces, particularly if lubricated with oil. Finally, the draw-plate and supports must be made from Iron. <figure/>The manufacturing methods that would possibly be employed in fabricating this system would include carpentry for the drum system, casting, forging, cutting, for the iron components and moulding(?) for the concrete rail. All such means are within the capacity of Roman technology and manufacturing techniques. <heading>Speed of wire drawing</heading>The only major drawback using such a system is the discontinuous nature of drawing. That is, once the wire carriage traverses the full length of the rail it must be reset to its initial position nearest to the draw-plate. The wire is them unclamped, pulled (or feed) through and re-clamped before the next cycle is initiated. The frequency of draw cycles depends upon the length of the rail. The smaller this length the more time consuming and slower is the overall wire drawing process due to the adjustments required at the end of each wire drawing cycle. Ideally, therefore, such a system will be designed and manufactured for a reasonable maximum length thus maximizing the speed of wire drawing. <heading>Quantity of wire drawing</heading>A factory housing a number of these wire drawing systems in series will certainly overcome any problem of productivity and enable the production of large quantities of wire. <heading>Conclusions</heading>The proposed wire drawing system is established upon basic if not intuitive engineering principles and relatively simple manufacturing techniques and material types that were certainly available to Roman technologists. Although the essence of this system is that it is based on the general principle of converting torque into linear tensile force to produce the required leverage, the other features of the system are not necessary but contingent. That is, there can be a number of variations to the system (see Appendix) while adhering to the outlined general principle of its functioning. Although it was said that inherent in the system were features that may affect the speed of wire drawing, such as the adjustments to the clamp at the beginning and end of each cycle, these are only localized aspects of the system which can be overcome by means of alternative design. However, a merit of this system due to its simplicity is its flexibility. The clamping system is such that wire of unlimited length may be drawn. An important question, regarding quantity of wire drawing, was also answered. It was suggested that a 'wire drawing factory' containing a number such systems operating in tandem has the potential to produce vast amounts of wire time efficiently. All in all, the proposed system appears to answer the questions of iron wire drawing and those of speed and quantity satisfactorily. <figure/><figure/>