<abstract>This report will determine what factors affect the functionality of control systems and how to prevent instability by adding other devices to them. Seven systems are analysed ranging from mechanical to electronic systems. The systems will be simulated and modelled theoretically in order to give a full insight into the depth of control system analysis using different techniques. A select few of the systems had controllers within them to help increase response time and stability. Some systems responded with a lot of damping or less damping in the case of the underdamped system. It was shown, that the system(s) that had the best response were those which were critically damped. It was discovered that the critically damped systems had controllers within them to regulate the system. </abstract><heading>1. Introduction</heading>Control and analysis of Control Systems has existed since the late 18 th century. It is an area that started with the invention of the Fly Ball Governor by James Watt. Since then, many different examples of control systems have been designed, each with different properties. The systems themselves may be mechanical, hydraulic, electronic, pneumatic etc, and exist virtually everywhere in society. Even animals and plants have types of control systems within themselves.[1] Mammals have the regulation of body temperature from homeostasis, and plants regulate the conversion of carbon dioxide into oxygen via photosynthesis. However, the basis of each of these separate systems remains the same: to provide a form of regulation, via the feedback of information. The information exists as a range of different types of quantities, for instance force in a mechanical system or a voltage in an electronic system.[2] The control system has three basic parts to it, if it is modelled as a black box. There is the input or the stimulus, the process (which is also denoted as a plant); which is the black box in the model, which uses the stimulus to create a suitable output; and a response. In reality the control system is more advanced than this containing hidden sub-processes and outputs in the overall system, which then helps to achieve the desired output of the system via feedback and regulation. Control has many uses from basic experiments such as small electronic circuits, and mass spring systems, to the design of much larger grandiose systems such as solar tracking units, which consist, in turn of many smaller sub-systems. Control is only easy if the engineer has the firm background and current understanding as to how to put the knowledge to good use, in order to analyse systems similar to the ones in this document. These systems will be explored and analysed within this document, by using numerous mathematical techniques for theoretical responses, and the use of the MATLAB software for the simulated responses. To do this, the transfer function of the systems will be deduced both analytically and will also be simulated within the MATLAB environment, for a range of different systems, covering additional features to the system such as P.I.D and Lead-Lag control. Both responses will be plotted on a step response graph, and these should line up over each other to indicate that both responses are the same. From these responses, Bode plots will be done on each individual system and will be analysed in order to ascertain properties of the system, for instance, the break frequency, which is the maximum frequency value the system will work at before noise and other factors make it less accurate and potentially unstable. These frequencies and other factors are vital to maintaining the best efficiency for the control system and to ensure it is working at its best potential. <heading>2. Methodology</heading><heading>2.1. System 1A: Mass, Spring and Damper System</heading><figure/><figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA Undamped System Confirming the above in MATLAB:  FORMULA  Since the simulated and the theoretical values for the transfer function are the same, then the inverse Laplace Transform is found to be:  FORMULA  This is the theoretical response of the system. The simulated response is found by giving the transfer function found via MATLAB a step input and both results along with the corresponding Bode diagram are shown in Figure 3. <figure/>The simulated output of the system and the theoretical output match, as expected. There is no exponential term in the expression for the inverse Laplace transform, hence no form of damping occurs. The system is undamped because of this, as the output just continues oscillating with a fixed amplitude of 2, because that is the gain (K value) of the system. The Bode diagram shows a spike on the magnitude plot at a frequency of 1.41 rad/s with magnitude of 143 dB, which corresponds with the phase diagram, where the phase is  FORMULA  . This is equivalent to the natural frequency of the system, which leads to instabilities if the frequency is greater than the natural frequency. The slope of the magnitude plot after the natural frequency is decreasing at a rate of -40dB/dec. This is because for every pole in the system, the magnitude decreases by 20db/dec. Since there are two repeated poles at 0 due to a  FORMULA  term in the denominator, the rate of decrease is doubled. <heading>2.2. System 2A: Electronic Circuit</heading><figure/><figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA Overdamped System Confirming the above in MATLAB gives:  FORMULA  Now the inverse Laplace transform is obtained:  FORMULA  <figure/>Both the simulated output and the theoretical output of the system are the same, as expected. The system is overdamped, and because of this, has a slower response time than other systems. In this case, a response time of 25s. The response stabilises at 0.33 because the step input given returns the value of 1/3 after the inverse Laplace transform. The Bode diagram starts at approximately -10dB as opposed to 0dB this is because electronic filters tend to have an inherent attenuation as the signal has Johnson noise interference in the resistor (as it dissipates power). It also has a break frequency  FORMULA  at 0.3 rad/sec, with a gradient of -40db/dec as there are two poles in the system.  FORMULA  was calculated by converting from the s-domain into the FORMULA -domain, and converting the expression into the standard form. The phase graph shows that as the frequency increases, the output compared to the input goes out of phase, until it is almost out of phase by 2π at very high frequencies. This electronic circuit is a typical example of a low-pass filter. Confirming the transfer function using a Two Port Network method with matrices gives:  FORMULA   FORMULA  If  FORMULA = 0:  FORMULA  <heading>2.3. System 3A: Second Order System with P.I.D Controller</heading><figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA  First Order System Confirming the above in MATLAB gives:  FORMULA  Since the simulated and the theoretical values for the transfer function are the same, then the inverse Laplace Transform is found to be:  FORMULA  This is the theoretical response of the system. The simulated response is found by giving the transfer function found via MATLAB a step input and both results along with the corresponding Bode diagram are shown in Figure 8. <figure/>The system is a type zero, First Order System. Both the theoretical and the simulated responses are the same, as expected. The response time of the system is extremely fast due to the value of the power of the exponential being large. The system becomes stable at 1 because the value of the step input tended to 1 before the inverse Laplace transform was applied. Due to only one pole in the system, the slope on the magnitude graph decays at 20dB/dec, with a break frequency  FORMULA  of 100rad/sec. The phase graph shows that the system will be out of phase by π/2 at high frequencies. This system acts as a low pass filter allowing the lower frequencies through up to and including 100rad/sec. P.I.D Control is used to control stability of a system and help to reduce steady state error, while improving the overall transient response. <heading>2.4. System 4A: Control using Lead-Lag and Velocity Feedback</heading><figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Underdamped System Confirming the above in MATLAB gives:  FORMULA  Since the simulated and the theoretical values for the transfer function are the same, then the inverse Laplace Transform is found to be:  FORMULA  This is the theoretical response of the system. The simulated response is found by giving the transfer function found via MATLAB a step input and both results along with the corresponding Bode diagram are shown in Figure 10. <figure/>The theoretical and simulated responses of the underdamped system match as expected. The function stabilises at 0.862 as the value of the step response tended towards this after the inverse Laplace transform. Due to the nature of the damping in the system, the magnitude Bode diagram has a small incline before its break frequency  FORMULA  which is approximately 1 rad/sec. The slope of the diagram shows a decay of 40dB/dec due to two poles in the system. The phase diagram also shows that after the difference in phase of the system of the input relative to the output there can only be a maximum difference of approximately π/2. Lead-Lag Control is used in connection with the phase of the system. If the phase of the output leads the input phase then overall stability of the system is improved, alongside a better performance at higher frequencies. If the output lags the input then the lower frequency performances are improved, and the stability is improved. <heading>2.5. System 1B: Solar Tracking Unit - Motor </heading><figure/><figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA First Order System Confirming the above in MATLAB gives:  FORMULA  Since the simulated and the theoretical values for the transfer function are the same, then the inverse Laplace Transform is found to be:  FORMULA  This is the theoretical response of the system. The simulated response is found by giving the transfer function found via MATLAB a step input and both results along with the corresponding Bode diagram are shown in Figure 13. <figure/>Both the simulated and the analytical values for the transfer functions matched, so both of the step response graphs map over each other to prove this. When the system is given a step input, the first order system reaches 63% of its final value when the time constant T is 0.5 seconds. After finding the inverse Laplace transform of the system, it is noticeable that the step input has been reduced to a stabilising value of 0.05, from both the constant in the inverse Laplace transform and the step response graph axis. The Bode diagram shows that there is a decay of 20dB/dec due to there being only one pole in the system. All circuits that have resistors and other power dissipating devices within them, will have some attenuation attached to them due to Johnson noise. In this case the attenuation is approximately -26dB as opposed to 0dB to compensate for the attenuation. The break frequency  FORMULA  is approximately 0.5 rad/sec. The phase diagram shows a steep drop in phase after 0.5 rad/sec due to passing the break frequency causing instability in the system. A new value of the resistor  FORMULA  needs to be found and it is calculated to be 20Ω. The block diagram also needs to be redrawn to allow for the gearbox and the output angle, which gives the diagram shown in Figure 14. <figure/><heading>2.6. System 2B: Solar Tracking Unit - System Modelling</heading><figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Overdamped System Confirming the above in MATLAB gives:  FORMULA  Since the simulated and the theoretical values for the transfer function are the same, then the inverse Laplace Transform is found to be:  FORMULA  This is the theoretical response of the system. The simulated response is found by giving the transfer function found via MATLAB a step input and both results along with the corresponding Bode diagram are shown in Figure 15. <figure/>The step response graph shows that both the analytical response and the simulated response are the same. It is shown that the system has a response time of approximately 14000 seconds. This implies that the system will move the solar tracker one degree in 14000 seconds. To move through 140 degrees would take an exceptionally long response time. Hence it is clear that the system has become overdamped after the potentiometers and the other parts of the system are added. After the inverse Laplace transform has been applied to the system, it is clear that the response of the step input stabilises at 1, due to the constant obtained after the transform has been applied. Due to an amplifier being added to the system, it has dramatically reduced the effect of any Johnson noise present in the system which causes attenuation. This is shown by the Bode diagram having a magnitude of 0dB as opposed to a negative magnitude. The decay on the magnitude diagram after the break frequency  FORMULA  is 40dB/dec because the system has two poles. The phase diagram shows that due to the damping of the system there are two steep drops where the system becomes incoherent, one of which occurs just after  FORMULA  and the other occurs around  FORMULA  <heading>2.7. System 3B: Solar Tracking Unit - Control of Solar Tracker</heading><figure/> FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Critically Damped System Since the overall system has to be second order and the overall system already has an integrator onboard, then the system for the controller and inductor has to be first order. This is achieved by cancelling down a pole by an identical zero of  FORMULA . Hence from this the controller can now be modelled in terms of a gain  FORMULA  and the  FORMULA . Also at present the output is in degrees but the output is desired to be in radians. To correct this error a block is added to the system which can convert from degrees to radians. The equation of the Controller C is in the form  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA Critically Damped System Confirming the above in MATLAB gives:  FORMULA  Since the simulated and the theoretical values for the transfer function are the same, then the inverse Laplace Transform is found to be:  FORMULA  This is the theoretical response of the system. The simulated response is found by giving the transfer function found via MATLAB a step input and both results along with the corresponding Bode diagram are shown in Figure 17. <figure/>The simulated and analytical responses are almost the same with a tiny exception due to rounding error so again the step responses of each map over each other, but the simulated has a slightly higher value where the response nears 1. The system has two repeated roots and is critically damped, which gives the best response time for the system. However the output time is now for the angle in radians, due to conversion, and 6 seconds is the output time for the solar collector to move by 1 radian. The collector has to move through an angle of  FORMULA or 2.443 radians, meaning that the total output time of the system is now 14.66 seconds. After the inverse Laplace transform is applied, the system stabilises at 1 due to the constant term being 1. Another consequence of the system being critically damped is the Bode diagram has become more generic. Since the amplifier is still in the system, its effect will also be causing the lack of Johnson noise from the resistor. The break frequency  FORMULA is now 1 rad/sec, and the magnitude graph again has a decay of 40dB/dec due to two poles in the system. The phase diagram shows that the system becomes unstable just after the break frequency and regains its stability after the frequency is approximately 10rad/sec. N.B. It is not necessary to model the power amplifier as a first order exponential lag response because the amplifier could become saturated and then fail to work. The system has sinusoidal inputs given to it and output responses are obtained as shown in Figure 18 (a) and Figure 18 (b). The waveforms show that for the overall system the faster the motor turns, the faster the solar tracking unit can return to its original position. This is useful for operating just after dark to realign the tracker ready for the next day. <figure/><heading>Conclusion</heading>The control systems modelled in this report are varied in what type of system they are and what variations of control they have. It has been found that the systems with extra control within them, such as the P.I.D control or the motor controller, had better response times than those which did not, such as the Lead Lag compensator which led to an underdamped response. The systems that lacked any controllers had slower responses, which shows that by adding control and cancelling poles and zeroes, a better system (ideally critically damped) can be obtained. The simulation of the electronic systems shows that Johnson noise can lead to attenuations in the response which causes disturbance. If in the case of the RLC circuit some more control was added, by placing another component into the system, then the attenuation could be reduced. The Solar tracking unit was steadily improved until it was critically damped and had a fast reaction time. Modifications are made to control systems all the time in order to increase the response time or to change the damping within the system. 