<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>Semiotics, that is, the science of signs, and the use of organisational analysis, can be used to great effect throughout the development lifecycle of an e-commerce system. This document attempts to apply these theories and relate to the business functions and associated IT strategies to demonstrate their usefulness. This Author will also attempt to relate a measure of personal understanding and experience along with information provided from thorough research from a multitude of resources, both in print and electronic. </abstract>Many consider e-Business, and the design of e-Business systems, to be a modern discipline, something that has only occurred with the coming of the 90's, Microsoft Windows, and the World Wide Web. However, contrary to the belief of many unfamiliar with the field, Information Technology has been used to supplement and enhance business practice for decades now - and the coming of the Information Age only builds upon this. Semiotics is an even older discipline. Historically employed in the fields of psychology and linguistics, many working in the Information industry have now begun to realise the potential and the value of employing this science in the development of information systems. The first step in the design of an E-Commerce system for business is to put aside many of the preconceptions. Many such ventures have turned disastrous, with large companies emerging from the 1980s with huge, unwieldy organisational structures, and attempting to follow the (initially, very successful-seeming) suit of the Dot Com enterprises that sprung up overnight. These lightweight organisations were able to initially succeed due to their rapid ability to change to keep up with market trends, and to adapt their organisation to their business model and tailor it to the demands of electronic commerce. Too many leaders of big business, with, as stated by Chu and Smithson, 'large companies with rigid bureaucratic structures that spanned the globe'[8], have made the mistake of assuming that merely technological changes need to be matched- employ the right computer systems, design a leading-edge system, and all is well. This was, all too often, disastrous. Semiotics and Organisational Analysis techniques detail the necessity to describe organisations, and the E-Business systems they wish to employ, in terms of communication - capturing the stages, processes and actors involved, so that E-Business can be aligned to support the business functions, not be at odds with them. The addition of E-Commerce to support one or more business functions can be, according to Beynon-Davis, achieved through five distinct models, based largely on the degree of integration of the system with the business, and largely dependent on environment and type of product or service, and industry within which the organisation operates  [4]. These five models are, ranging from the most integrated to the most separate system integration: Separate organisation, Parallel organisation, Semi-Autonomous organisation, Fully integrated within informatics service, and  Fully integrated organisation. These models describe ways in which an organisation can support business functions through the employment of E-Business either in-house, in a carbon-copy organisation set up to deal purely with electronic transactions, or through a third-party, to a fully integrated system. Chong and Liu state that 'An e-commerce system cannot be treated as a trading tool isolated from business norms. Benefits are gained from the way we use e-commerce systems, not from their technological components.[9]'. Time and again, authors and experts in the field stress the importance that E-Commerce should be treated as an aid and supplement to support existing business functions - not as a 'bolt-on extra' or 'magic bullet'. The design of an E-Commerce system almost always is preceded one or more processes of user requirements determination specification. When designing such a system to support the alignment of the IT infrastructure and existing business practice and processes, correct requirements specification is a necessity - and Semiotics and Organisational Analysis can help. <table/><list></list>The day-to-day business functions and operations are governed by a number of social norms - both formally represented in codes of practice, established procedures, and rules, and informal norms that form the culture of an organisation. Accurately determining these norms and building them in to the design of an E-Commerce system as constrains and assumptions allows business functions to be better represented. For instance, this Author was responsible for assisting in the re-development of a medium-sized secondary school network, upgrading the network management software and operating system. Part of the upgrade gave users the ability to change their logon passwords at their workstations. However, it is the accepted practice that all students other than the sixth form must come to the IT Support helpdesk to request password changes due to them commonly changing passwords and subsequently forgetting them- thus generating a high volume of password reset requests. It is generally accepted that the younger students must come to the office to request a change of password, to dissuade them from changing their passwords unless absolutely necessary. This is an example of a business norm - no where was the practice documented or specified - it is just a generally accepted and established practice. The ability to disable personal password changes at the workstation had to be represented in the design of the new system - an example of analysing, specifying and representing business norms in development of IS/IT systems. At the time, however, the requirements for the new system were not accurately specified, to the degree where norms such as this were not considered and remained unrepresented in the system. A better method of eliciting user requirements to take into account such norms and requirements was needed - and this is where Organisational Analysis can help. MEASUR (Methods for Eliciting, Analysing and Specifying Users' Requirements) is a technique for social-level analysis of an organisation to model business systems and assist in uncovering, exposing and documenting in a logical and structured way the underlying norms of an organisation. MEASUR includes five major methods for using Semiotics to determine requirements: Problem Articulation Method (PAM), Semantic Analysis Method (SAM), Norm Analysis Method (NAM), Communication & Control Analysis, and Meta-System Analysis. These methods will not all be explained in detail, as many volumes of information on them can be found, with the references in the appendix of this document providing at least a good grounding in them. It is of their applicability to the design of E-Business systems that is of particular interest. The underpinnings of any successful E-Commerce systems are cases where technology has been used to support business functions, norms, processes, and allow the management to concentrate on what they do best - that organisation's business - with technology acting as the enabler for enhanced or expanded activity. Leer writes 'At the turn of the century, most organizations with their own web sites consider themselves 'wired', but they are simply using the web site for old-style marketing and information purposes - somewhere to post a glorified product catalogue  [2]'.Almost inevitably, shoehorning organisations into technology, and forcing unwelcome change or detrimental practices on an organisation for the sake of the technology will lead to failure. Businesses and organisations wishing to make best use of IT need not an IT or E-Commerce strategy - they need business strategies that embrace E-Commerce, along with its opportunities and risks [2]. It is through semiotic theory and organisational analysis that the social, interpersonal, and communication aspects can be considered when designing E-Commerce systems, rather than the technology-lead approach all too often taken by organisations. Before the design of an E-Business system, it is important to examine exactly the types of E-Business implementations that exist, from an organisational point of view. Typically, there are three types of E-Business: Business-to-Customer (B2C), Business-to-Business (B2B), and Business-to-Employee (B2E). Each type of E-Business features the most basic unit conceptualisation of its communications between related parties - the transaction. Gordon and Gordon define a transaction as 'A unit of business activity, such as purchasing a product, making a banking deposit, or reserving an airline seat [6]'. It is by analysing these transactions, and discovering the semantics and pragmatics that govern them, that we can begin to understand the underlying business processes and encapsulate them, and support them by building technological solutions around them. By understanding how the signs associated with these transactions are created and communicated within the context and culture of the organisation(s), areas where technology can be applied to achieve benefit can be readily identified. One such method for semiotic analysis of organisations will be examined and applied to the issue of designing an E-Business system - that of the Semiotic Framework. This specifies six divisions of the structure and function of signs (within an organisation, in this context) into which we can divide the business process of, for example, an on-line shopping website. Such an example is given below: <list><heading>Division</heading>HCISocial World - Exchange of funds, expectation for delivery of correct item(s)Pragmatics - Intention of user to browse and discover information, and/or buySemantics - Familiarity with concepts of searching, shopping carts, etc.IT SYSTEMSyntactics - Web page interface- tables, text, images, buttons, formsEmpirics - TCP/IP, HTTP, HTML, ASP, other web protocolsPhysical World - Telephone lines (analogue/ADSL digital/ISDN), fibre optic, satellite internet connection</list><fnote>HCI - Human-Computer Interface </fnote>This provides a very broad overview of how a transaction over an online store might be broken down into the component levels to examine the signs used in that communication. Further division could be made to examine all the use cases of a potential E-Commerce system to determine the exact underlying processes and business norms that are reflected, and indeed must be adequately represented, by these electronic interactions between the concerned parties, be they customers, other businesses, or employees. After creating a simple model such as that demonstrated above, further Semiotic Diagnosis can be employed to enhance the model of the business processes that will later be aligned to the functions to be supported by E-Business. The more detailed techniques prescribed by MEASUR can be employed to better understand the signs and functions of a business and how they can be transformed by the application of technology. Organisational structure analysis is also key to successfully aligning business processes to a new E-Commerce system. Beynon-Davies defines the structure of an organisation in three aspects: Division of Labour (the way tasks and responsibilities are delegated), Chain of Command (the relationship of powers and authority), and Specification of Rules and Procedures (which govern expected ways of working) [4]. For example: A telephone-based retailer of tickets for concerts wishes to expand into E-Commerce by offering their services via the World Wide Web. Their organisation can be examined (in brief overview) in terms of its structure: Division of Labour: Team A sources tickets from concert promoters and venues; Team B takes telephone orders and processes payments; Team C handles the fulfilment of orders and dispatch to customers, and deal with quality and customer satisfaction issues. Chain of Command: Each team is managed by a Team Leader, who co-ordinates their team; A small team of middle-managers co-ordinate inter-team communication and interaction; An even smaller team directs policy and strategy of the entire company. Specifications of Rules and Procedures Payments are accepted by Credit or Debit card only; A maximum of 10 tickets are permitted to be sold per transaction; Customers must receive tickets at least 5 days before schedule date of concert; The company allocates tickets in seating areas at their discretion. The structure of the organisation has been identified (in this very simple example) and the E-Business functions can now be mapped on to it: Division of Labour: Team A is responsible for updating the website with new tickets; Team B handles customer queries regarding E-Payment, sent by email or web-form feedback, and maintain E-Payment links with bank and website; Team C receives processed orders as output from the system and fulfils the order, logging dispatches using barcode scanners, so that the system can email the customer when their tickets have been dispatched. Chain of Command: The Team Leader is responsible for the co-ordination of the particular functions of their team with regards to their interactions with the system and its proper use; The middle-managers ensure that procedures are followed and the system is used to its full potential and that the correct data is passed between teams; The management direct online marketing and strategy, and ensure that the IT infrastructure is providing value and return on investment (ROI). Specification of Rules and Procedures; The system accepts secure payment through the website by credit or debit card; No more than 10 of the same ticket can be added to the shopping cart per transaction - and customers' IP address and account information (particularly delivery address) are used to determine which customers have already equalled their quota for any given concert; Details of successful transactions are passed immediately via electronic mail to the fulfilment team, and they are required to scan an envelope barcode when tickets are dispatched. Each transaction is time-stamped and those that are about to exceed the accepted limit (5 days) are reported by email to managers automatically; The system automatically allocates seating areas when the customer chooses the number of tickets they require (this is explained by a dialog box that the user must accept before proceeding). This very simple example demonstrates how Semiotic and organisational analysis can be used to capture snapshots of the social issues that need to be reflected in an organisations' strategy. It puts it in the context of a simple E-Commerce system, but when expanded upon and extended, could be used to model all manner of systems, be they B2B, B2C or B2E. Another example is given. A E-Commerce system designed by this Author for selling DVDs online to support the existing functions of a small high-street retailer in Reading (this is a fictional example, based on University project work) can be analysed in terms of the Semantic Analysis Method (SAM). In order to accomplish this, certain components of the social and technical level of the process of selling DVDs online need to be identified. Agents (representing roles taken on by individuals when interacting with the organisation within this context), Affordances (patterns of behaviour and possible activities dependent on the agent(s) in question - the ontological dependency, and the norms and objects, can all be represented in a Norm Analysis. Part of this Analysis includes a diagram such as that shown. <figure/>The diagram demonstrates a highly simplified representation of an aspect of FilmReel.com's business processes through analysis of norms. Stakeholders, that is, all parties with an interest in the success of the business (customers, shareholders, employees, and more) interact with system and play the roles of buyer and seller, using the organisation (and in the case of the E-Commerce system, the  URL  website) to enable those interactions. Liu states 'This method gives a means to specify the general patterns of behaviour of the agents in the business system [1]'. In the case of this example, an agent could be a customer (role) coming to the business via the website and purchasing a product, and the business (in its role as Seller) fulfilling that order. Each interaction can be broken down and defined in terms of the six layers discussed earlier. Other components of MEASUR, such as PAM and SAM can be used to describe other communications within the business and articulate them into diagrams and useful formats which can be applied in the design of an E-Commerce system to supplement business activities with electronic versions of these communications and signs. The use of Semiotic theory and techniques such as MEASUR represent only part of the solution of modelling organisations to align IT and business practices in E-Commerce design. Other techniques exist to take these extracted, refined and modelled business norms and turn them into models of the actually system in more technical terms. Unified Modelling Language (UML) allows for the actual process of development of an Information System to allow interactions between proposed electronic elements to be modelled and to represent business norms using a specific, scientific notation and to translate those norms and elements into equivalents that can be programmed in to a system as constraints and assumptions. Such a process is beyond Semantic Analysis and, as such, the scope of this document, however it is important to be aware of tools such as UML for their usefulness in processing information gleaned through semantic and organisational analysis techniques. It is hoped that this document has provided, firstly, an explanation and justification for a need to analyse the social concerns in terms of business signs and communications when designing an E-Commerce system, and secondly, and overview and explanation of some of the techniques for determining requirements, discovering and representing business norms, and analysing structural considerations, and using this information to ensure that business processes are in alignment with the technology. One of the key themes this document attempts to stress is the use of technology as an enabler to support business functions - not for its own sake. The organisation that bears this in mind at all times and uses semiotics to build technology, where value can be added, around those social and communication structures can succeed in supplementing and enhancing their activities on-line. 