<heading>'You are leader of a project to develop a new software programme for your client that involves a team around you of three people, c20 weeks work and a cost of £100k to the customer......and it needs to work by 28 February 2006. Do a 'contingency analysis' on it....what should you do to wreck it? Then turn it round and provide five important things to do to make itsuccessful!' - Dr Paul Naylor</heading>Appropriate planning and analysis of risk is crucial in the preparation for the building of this system. A contingency analysis could reveal the following risks: The deadline leaves less than four months from project initiation to completion; The 'needs to work' requirement is ambiguous - it does not take into account whether adequate testing, training or implementation is carried out - the customer may not realise this and be shocked when simply a piece of software is delivered to them on a CD; In a small team (four people), sickness or absence of a member may mean a gap in skills and stall or halt development of the software; Development of a new software package apposed to the evolution of an existing system carries the risk that requirements are not accurately determined; Strategies for success: <list>Thorough consultation to determine User Requirements accurately;Ensure team are able to function with the loss of one or members - interchangeable roles;Determine timescale accurately to take into account a full development cycle;Make best use of time available though careful time planning (GAANT charts, lifecycles);Discuss and determine relative performance requirements with customer given time and budget.</list><heading>'What issues may arise if a company uses consultants that are unethical? • Identify two issues. • Explain what the issue is and why it relates to the ethical behaviour of the consultant. • For each issue suggest one thing a company could do to reduce the risk of it occurring.' - Paul Evans, Sarah Ashley and Simon Piesse, Ernst & Young Consultancy</heading>The use of unethical consultancies by an organisation may give rise to a number of problems. Two such issues are: Customers, or partner organisations, may not wish to be involved with a company that adopts unethical practices or endorses unethical practice through its dealings with a consultant. This may be for a number of reasons - individuals and consumers may find that it goes against their conscience, and other organisations may have adopted a charter that prohibits them from dealing with unethical partners. A possible solution to this problem is to ensure that the company uses only consultants that are perceived to be ethical, or, to ensure that the use of unethical consulting is unlikely to affect relationships with partner organisations or customers through an appropriate study and research. Dealing with a consultant considered unethical may well lead to the behaviour of the consultant with respect to your business to be less than honest. For example, they may provide inaccurate, overpriced, below-par services, cutting corners and saving costs in order to make a bigger profit. To reduce the risk, organisations could refer to successful cases with other similar businesses and consultants concerned in each case in selecting a consultancy. <heading>How would the postal rule affect contemporary technological methods of communicating acceptance (e.g. email, webpage click-wraps, SMS)? - Martha-Marie Kleinhams</heading>Despite being subject to considerable criticism, the postal rule is one of some antiquity in English law. The formal view adopted is that in a contractual agreement, acceptance becomes effective upon the posting of the letter of acceptance. The case commonly cited as authority for the existence of this rule is Adams v Lindsell (1818) - but the rule did not become formalised until a later decision in the House of Lords in 1848 (the case of Dunlop v Higgins). Modern technology has meant that contract offers are being made and accepted electronically. In today's world, this means websites, email, using text messages, faxes, and other modern electronic media. Application of the antiquated Postal Rule is difficult in the case of contract disputes made in these ways. In the year 2000, the European Union issued the EC Directive on Electronic Commerce. Article 9(1) requires Member States to ensure that contracts can be concluded by electronic as well as traditional methods, and that electronically-accepted contracts have the same legal effectiveness and validity as traditional acceptances. As such, web button-clicks, emails and the like are to be governed by an updated Postal Rule to cover what constitutes acceptance when they are used. <heading>'Assume that you are a senior person in a high-technology industrial research organisation. Your management has expressed concern about the effect of "disruptive technologies" on the business. How would you define a strategy for the technical community to recognise and inform the company about potential "disruptive technologies" that are likely to affect the business, either as a threat or as an opportunity? Note that a "disruptive technology" is one which will either radically transform a market, create a wholly new market, or destroy an existing market. (Possible prize to be given by Thales for best strategy)' - Prof Edward Stansfield, Thales</heading>The identification of the emergence of a potentially 'disruptive' technology is crucial to allow the business to recognise threats and opportunities actioned by some new technological breakthrough. This recognition needs an established process that can be adopted and followed by the technical areas of the business and allow relevant information to be forwarded to management in a timely manner. A potential strategy could comprise the following: Creating a database to hold potential data on disruptive technologies. Give access for technical persons to contribute and management to review and produce reports; Monitoring the activities of competitors and market breakthroughs and logging the outcomes to the database; Technical breakthroughs or developments are logged to the database, defining in simple terms what the technology achieves as an end result, rather than complexities of how it works; Management can conduct periodic reviews with heads of technical departments to ask for suggestions on 'better ways of doing things' to spark the imaginations and encourage continued thought on how to transform practices or open up new markets; Technical staff can be encourage to log perceived threats to an established practice or market, or and existing technology, to the database. <heading> 'Part 1: What sort of people challenges would you face when introducing a new quality process in a large well established organisation with processes in place already? Part 2: How would you go about implementing these changes?' - Dr Pali Surdhar, BeCrypt Ltd.</heading>The introduction of a new set of Quality Assurance (QA) processes into a large organisation, with its own culture, methods, and team practices can be fraught with difficulty. Some of these challenges can include: Resistance to change due to the established methods and die-hard attitudes of long serving staff; The size of the organisation can make it inflexible - making integrating new QA processes into an existing, aged framework difficult; The new QA processes may not be appropriate to the type of work and require modification and adaptation to be suitable; Implementing changes to QA processes can be accomplished, firstly, by overcoming resistance to change in staff culture. Encouraging three key elements among staff - the desire to change, the ability to change, and the permission to change, can help a closed or institutionalised culture to adapt and accept new processes. Reviewing the architecture and organisation of practices and modernising them to incorporate the new practices can alleviate problems of rigid organisational structures in such large enterprises. And re-organisation of departments into smaller, more flexible teams, where staff feel empowered may allow them to more readily adopt change. <heading> 'You are asked to prepare a brief report for your fellow company directors on a competitor company. Using the internet as a resource, examine any PLC company of your choice, prepare a report which includes a minimum of five key indicators, explaining the significance of each indicator and why you have chosen it.' - Fred McCrindle, Tenon</heading>British American Tobacco PLC The success of the operations of British American Tobacco in 2004 can be measured using a number of metrics. The Financial Review boasts a successful message, the company's 'fundamental strength and geographic diversity'. Indicators chosen to measure this success include: <list>Pre-tax profit: £1,886m - up by £319m, increase of 20%A measure of the gross profit made by the Group, from all brands (Pall Mall, Lucky Strike and others). Significant in that it demonstrates the success of the firm in its main activity - making a large, healthy profit.Dividends per share: 41.9p for 2004, increase of 8%The success of BAT has meant that they can pay bigger dividends their shareholders, improving investor confidence and attracting future investment.Savings in reducing overheads and indirect costs: £89m, increase of £25mRe-structuring of the business has lead to greater savings in outgoings, demonstrating efficiency in the organisations' activities.Operating profit - increase of 2%Important factor in demonstrating the company's financial clout and freedom, maintaining flexibilityGroup volumes - 853bn, increased by 8%The volume of products (cigarettes) sold and its increase demonstrates the company's success in selling, and the market demand for the product.</list>