1979 was a very turbulent and crucial year in the history of Nicaragua - the largest of the Central American republics, with an area of 130,700 square kilometres, and economy based mainly on agricultural revenues. After almost half century of oligarchic dictatorship of the Somoza dynasty (from 1936), the country experienced an insurrection led by the Sandinista National Liberation Front ( URL ), FSLN- founded in 1961; named after the assassinated Augusto Ceasar Sandino, the leader of a peasant army fighting the US occupant in the period 1926-33 (Evans, 1988). The political change provided a great opportunity to redefine rural and agricultural policy in Nicaragua, which the new government understood and was willing to perform, but did not avoid making many mistakes which inevitably led to the decrease in number of the supporters and consequently to the loss of political power. The aim of this essay is to investigate the steps the Sandinista government undertook to amend Nicaragua's agricultural and rural development strategy. First, the situation inherited after the Somoza period will be presented. Then revolutionary regime's decisions concerning the agricultural sector will be examined. As the strategies were subject to several shifts and changes, they will be presented in chronological order. It is necessary to describe the actual situation the Sandinistas faced after gaining the rule of the country, as it obviously affected their decisions. There is no doubt that they were committed to the idea of agrarian reform, but it is argued that no exact plans concerning the appropriate methods and instruments existed in the moment of taking over the power. To support this assertion Barraclough and Scott (1987) mention that Sandinista were not actually aware how much land in reality the Somoza group possessed. E.g. in the beginning of 1980 numerous officials were convinced that by confiscating the old regime's properties, half of the country's agricultural area had been nationalised, whereas it made up only one-fifth of the productive agricultural land in terms of value. The Somoza clique had been nonetheless making huge profits from focusing activity in agro-export processing rather than in not so lucrative production of primary goods. Under their rule in the mid 1970's agriculture contributed to 18.3 % of the gross domestic product (GDP) and agriculture-related industries added as much as 9.6 % of GDP (Ryan, 1995). It is important to underline that agricultural produce was much appreciated by the state as it dominated Nicaragua's exports, providing hard currency. The country under the Somoza period underwent transformation of the economy through introduction of cotton, sugar, cattle and fishing as new export goods, and construction a manufacturing base of simple wage goods (FitzGerald, 1985). Ryan (1995) reports that in 1976 unprocessed and lightly processed agricultural goods brought $428 million of Nicaragua's total $542 million of exports, which meant a foreign exchange surplus, that other sectors of economy promptly used. Although it was a spectacular achievement, this pro-export strategy also implied that practically everything revolved around this activity, which for obvious financial reasons had priority over e.g. people's basic needs. Wheelock (cited in: Ryan, 1995) illustrates it with an example of the coffee boom in the late 19 th century when the natives were eliminated and small-holders moved to areas with poorer soil in order to satisfy this export produce demand for land. FitzGerald (1985) notices also that even though the Somoza economic model provided foreign exchange, the reliance on the export products created a situation of dependence from such sources of producer goods as the USA, Western Europe and Japan. What is more, it also led to dissatisfaction of many Nicaraguans whose basic needs were not met, and peasants in particular who were desperate to work their own piece of land. The revolutionary Sandinista government came with the populist slogans which promised to address those and many other problems. It pledged to carry out an extensive agrarian reform and people seemed to believe that FSLN would, according to its 1969 program, "freely transfer land to the peasants in accordance with the principle that the land should belong to those who work it" or as in 1978 version- more specifically distribute land confiscated from Somoza clique "to landless peasants and all those who wish to go work the land" (FSLN 1979 and 1981). Keeping these promises proved rather troublesome. Since the Sandinista regime was forced to deal with land tenure issue (or more precisely large numbers of the landless and smallholders hoping to receive a land title), it is useful to describe land structure in Nicaragua shortly before the political change. In 1978 nearly half the agricultural land was occupied by 3,000 farms of over 350 hectares each (making up no more than 2% of all farms). 38% of farms were occupied by medium sized (35-350 hectares) producers and finally family sized (7-35 hectares) farms were placed on 12 % of the area. As many as 17% of the farm labour force was made up by landless seasonal workers (Barraclough, 1983). Approximately 45,000 landless workers benefited directly from new revolutionary policies through new employment and participating in newly established state-owned farms (UPEs) or through receiving access to land they could cultivate within the said state farms. So wages and social conditions on those farms improved considerably (Barraclough and Scott, 1987). The Sandinistas strategy in the framework of agricultural economy had several key objectives, that Wheelock (1985, in: Kaimowitz, 1986) summarises as: 1) creation of a strong, modern, centrally planned state sector, 2) maintaining production in other sectors (generally though less favoured), 3) retaining political tactical alliance with the capitalist producers, 4) guaranteeing the urban population access to basic foodstuffs at stable (and low) prices, 5) gaining control over surplus generated in private agricultural sector, without the necessity to nationalise production. Ministry of Agriculture - MIDINRA (cooperating with other institutions such as Ministry of Planning - MIPLAN) ensured that agricultural planning met these objectives. Initially creation of state farms that were to become symbols of the revolution in the countryside, was possible due to expropriation of large Somoza group landholdings. It is evident that authorities were originally interested in the idea of extending the area of state farms, as these were given much needed privileged access to credit, foreign exchange and direct subsidies (Kaimowitz, 1986). Such strategy stemmed from an initial belief that large state farms would be more efficient (thanks to the economies of scale) which Daniel Ortega expressed in the following words : "it is more profitable for 10,000 peasants to work in a large farm than for each one to work separately" (Ryan, 1995). It is argued though that existence of such benefits was hardly ever the case and there is evidence that performance was far from satisfactory for different reasons, including lack of autonomy in taking decisions and lack of incentives to reduce costs (Binswanger et al, 1995). Additionally it was also more convenient for the authorities to control such large-scale production, where there were fewer entities than in a small-holder dominated environment. Yet state farms were a part (but an important one) of Nicaraguan model of mixed economy, which was chosen for various economic and political motives. Evans (1988) claims that the main reason for this choice was a fear that too radical a change (i.e. elimination of private property) could possibly lead to collapse of production, especially in the key agro-export sector. Another factor influencing the choice of policy was, as Evans goes on to explain, the fact that FSLN had entered into alliance with a part of the bourgeoisie, and that such conduct could facilitate gaining international legitimacy, so that it would be harder for the US government to justify military intervention. Having chosen the mixed economy model, the Sandinista had to put their ambitious ideas into practice. The task was not the easiest one as in 1979 they needed to design an agrarian reform policy that would not undermine the commitment to the policy of national unity but would also secure the place of popular hegemony principles in the implementation of the agrarian policy. At first the policy of national unity seemed to have been favored, to the disadvantage of the peasantry, but the focus was to be shifted towards popular hegemony by the 1986 reform (Luciak, 1987). Ministry of Agriculture reports three stages of the agrarian reform: establishment of the state farm sector, establishment of the cooperative sector and the prioritization of peasants. Luciak develops this explanation in the following division: 1) the confiscation of the Somoza landholdings and the consolidation of the state farms, from 1979 to 1983, 2) special titling programs at the agricultural frontier and the promotion of service and production cooperatives, from 1983 to 1985, 3) the process of land distribution to individual farmers from 1985 onwards. Agrarian reform was given a very important place in the Sandinista political program (FitzGerald, 1985). Straight after taking over the power in the country, the new government issued decrees no. 3 and 38 (of 20 July and 8 August 1979 respectively) legitimizing confiscation of the Somocista properties, which however were not redistributed to the landless peasants because that was thought too disruptive for the economy, based on large-scale modern farms producing agro-export goods (FitzGerald, 1985). Instead a system of state farms was put in place, consisting of 92 agricultural complexes (with over 2,000 state farms) employing over 64,855 workers (Thome and Kaimowitz, 1985). It is also worth noting that a very important decree no. 782 was promulgated in August 1981- "The Agrarian Law". It targeted owners with abandoned, idle, underused or rented land and it marked the beginning of land redistribution to cooperatives (Luciak, 1987). Still, these were the state farms that received more than twice as much land as cooperatives and individual peasants altogether, which was consistent with MIDINRA's opinion (valid until 1982) that socialist transition should be accomplished through collectivization and state sector (Deereal. 1985). The position favoring state farms appears to have been revised, which is confirmed by Jamie Wheelock (cited in: Luciak, 1987) stating that it had been the policy of the Sandinista wanted to reduce the size of farms if their efficient administration by the government was not possible. It seems to find expression also in the data quoted by Luciak (1987): between 1981 and 1985 almost 263,000 manzanas (1 manzana=0.7 hectares) were removed from the state sector and handed over for the purposes of the agrarian reform. The revolutionary government provided financial credit for the farmers, especially those engaged in the export production, so even negative real interest rates were offered and profitable export prices were guaranteed in such a way that increase in international prices would be covered by the government and also any increase in the world price would result in sharing profits among the state and the growers (Enriquez, 1997;Collins, 1982). It must be underlined though that the Sandinista government made sure that prices of basic foodstuffs (such as corn, beans, edible sorghum), produced mainly by small farmers, were kept at a low level, so as to enable their purchase by the urban population. That was consistent with a cheap foods policy (with price controls on basic staples, subsidies), that first of all consisted in assuring food security and thus was aiming at getting support of the masses (that experienced hunger before 1979) for the revolution (Biondi-Morra, 1993). David Close (1988) claims that the FSLN could maintain wages relatively low, because people's basic needs were satisfied so cheaply. Another conclusion may be drawn from such strategy: consumption subsidies were at the same time subsidies for producers. Yet, such policy proved hard to carry out in the long run, as it was less and less affordable for the government to keep the price controls in place, so they started being eliminated in 1985 (Martinez, 1993). Food security was a challenging issue for the Sandinista, as some shortages occurred, leaving the poorer groups of the society hungry and upset (which had big impact for their opinion about the revolution as a whole). Excessive exports that used to be so encouraged by the authorities, in 1982 brought an undesired side-effect - sugar shortage, which was handled by introduction of a rationing system, that later covered also further goods (Austin et al., 1985).Situation where there were official lower prices and insufficient supply of commodities, black market and speculation emerged, which was very difficult to bring under control, especially as the government had to face the opposition of the contras and the US military intervention (Close, 1988). Martinez (1993) points out that much of the domestic production got wasted before reaching the market due to inefficient transport and storage infrastructure. Disillusion with this early export policy (whose poor effects might have also been due to external factors, such as unexpected slump of world food prices) in a slight shift towards a strategy more focused on the needs of the peasantry, that in 1981 benefited from the law of forced rents. According to this law, all idle or under worked land had to be rented at legally established rates (Deere et al., 1985). The government also introduced a programme of granting peasants with the titles to land for which they did not have a property right (Barraclough, Scott, 1987). The authorities were very generous with granting credit (through the nationalised bank system) but in a quite unreasonable way. E.g. state owned agribusiness enterprises were major beneficiaries of this lenient policy that presumed that they, irrespectively of their financial performance, should be supported at any cost. And so amount of credit for them increased, but subsequently- due to losses- their debt grew higher (Biondi-Morra, 1993). Therefore about 1982, the Sandinista regime started to channel the support to the entities that were newly prioritized - cooperatives. Such adjustment of strategy was judged positive, but Martinez (1993) observes that even then the majority of peasants did not benefit in a great way from the change. Year 1985 seemed to be a breakthrough, as rate of land distribution to individuals was 300% higher than during the previous six years (Martinez1993) and other changes followed. It could be described as an expression of the Sandinista government turning more boldly from its initial policy of national unity (aiming at maintaining a "multi-class alliance") to popular hegemony, as Luciak (1987) observed. Cooperatives that proved not to be very popular with the peasantry, became more flexible and diversified, i.e. combining collective and individual production (Kaimowitz,1988). Cheap food policy principles had to be revised in the context of the economic hardship (including high inflation, unstable situation due to the war) the state faced, so producer prices were raised to stimulate production, subsidies on basic foods were reduced, and investment money was directed to productive inputs and rationalisations in the peasant sector (Martinez, 1993). The 1986 reform of the agrarian reform law (Presidential Decree no.14) had an important feature consisting in elimination of the bottom acreage limits for expropriation of idle, underused, or rented land (previously the limits applicable were: 500 manzanas in the Pacific regions and 1,000 manzanas in the rest of the country). The new law also eliminated compensation for expropriated properties, and formalised expropriations for public use or social interest (Luciak,1987). It can be said that hunger for land was partially satisfied, but the state of the economy that Nicaragua achieved under the Sandinista rule, was rather poor. At the end of the decade, they had to admit that market needed more independence from the state, so by 1989 it was allowed to determine important economic variables (previously under control of the state), including the exchange rate (Ryan, 1995). Certain austerity measures were taken in an attempt to revive the economy (Everingham, 2001). The Nicaraguan Agrarian Reform was declared finished in early February 1989 by then Minister of Agriculture, Jamie Wheelock Roman. It meant that the process of redefining the agricultural relations of production was completed. According to Martinez (1993), it resulted in one of the most successful land redistributions in Latin America as approximately 2,024,000 hectares were handed over to 120,000 families. However it is argued that Nicaragua became at the same time poorer during the Sandinista decade in power and the basic nutritional needs of the less affluent part of the nation were not satisfied, as it had been promised in the early days of the revolution (Biondi-Morra, 1993). The face of the Nicaraguan countryside had been transformed, but the result bore little resemblance to the FSLN leadership's original vision, as state farms occupied as little as 11.7% of the arable land and the cooperative sector made up 13.8%. On the other hand, large and medium-sized capitalist producers had 6.4%, and the individual peasants enjoyed the property rights to as much as 48.7% (Ryan, 1993). "Higher forms of production", that the leaders wanted to impose, failed to bring success to the Sandinista designed mixed economy. The ten year long rule was composed of both success but also failures due to misjudgments of actual situation and sometimes implementing conflicting policies concerning agriculture. It seems to be true to say that the agrarian reform left major part of the peasantry disillusioned and dissatisfied (Martinez, 1993). Also the economy as a whole did not thrive in spite of the original growth from 1980 through 1983, as such problems as sharp war-driven inflation and increasing foreign debt emerged ( URL ). The Sandinistas could be considered as quite flexible and rather pragmatic, as throughout their rule they applied a series of adjustments or even complete changes of strategies (e.g. significant reduction of public employment, elimination of subsidies for basic foods). The economy was in crisis. Still they were convinced that they would manage to improve things, and in fact the FSLN 1990 election slogan was worded: "Everything will be better". But they did not have a chance to put it into practice as they lost this election. 