Satisfaction, a notion existent in many areas of people's lives, proves to be a state which is extremely hard to reach and even harder to maintain for longer, still in spite of difficulties and unsuccessful attempts, human beings never cease to look for it. (The famous Rolling Stones classic song "Satisfaction" seems to summarise the dilemma pretty well). The process of reaching it becomes more complex, when it is realised how many various definitions could describe satisfaction as well as its numerous shades and levels. No matter how hard the task is, it is certainly considered worthwhile by the companies (especially customer focused) and marketing researchers who are aware of the fact that satisfaction is one of the key concepts in understanding consumers' behaviour and thus being able to provide them with goods and services they want and need. Anything that we buy and use may be a source of satisfaction (or dissatisfaction), so food being without a doubt the thing purchased and consumed most often, constitutes a good example to show how consumer becomes impressed or quite contrarily- disappointed with a product, but most importantly why and how it takes place. Food market is nowadays very fragmented due to the big number of companies, competing products and most of all largely differentiated consumer groups, i.e. segments. Consumers, by expecting and demanding wider choice of better quality, healthier food, more conveniently prepared and served, make the food market evolve faster and become more customer friendly in every sense of the word (Matanda, Mavondo, Schroder, 1999). Fresh food- not preserved by canning or dehydration or freezing or smoking ( URL ), which is a sub-segment of the large food market, is an important part of the market as consumers are attracted by products that don't contain preservatives. So not only do the producers have to meet those expectations, but it is more advisable for them to exceed them (e.g. by adding new features). Many models explaining the idea of consumer satisfaction have been elaborated, but disconfirmation (or expectations/expectancy-disconfirmation) model seems to be providing the most popular explanation of this phenomenon (Finn, McQuitty, Wiley, 2000; Cadotte, Jenkins, Woodruff, 1987). It is worth mentioning that it was preceded by the confirmation model, drawing on an assumption that satisfaction means meeting merely consumer expectations (East, 1997), which were defined as the anticipation of future consequences based on prior experience, current circumstances and other information (Oliver, 1980; Matanda, Mavondo, Schroder, 1999). East (1997) points out that Oliver (1980) referred to contentment as a state when the consumed good satisfied positively the individual, and develops the idea by adding the term discontent for the situations in which negative expectations are confirmed. The confirmation model involves low level of arousal as the consumer has familiarity/habit with the satisfactory or unsatisfactory produce and therefore is not surprised by its performance (e.g. usually purchased bread). In contrast with the above-mentioned theory, disconfirmation model is based on the state of high arousal. If a product only triggered off neutral feelings, then consumer's attitude and then behaviour would not be likely to change, but here an element of surprise is involved. Satisfaction can then be treated as: <quote>the summary psychological state resulting when the emotion surrounding disconfirmed expectations is coupled with the consumer's prior feelings about the consumption experience. Moreover the surprise or excitement of this evaluation is thought to be of finite duration, so that satisfaction soon decays into (but nevertheless greatly affects) one's overall attitude toward purchasing products. (Oliver, 1981 in East ,1997) </quote>or <quote>the consumer's fulfillment response. It is a judgement that a product or a service feature, or the product of service itself, provided (or is providing) a pleasurable level of consumption-related fulfillment, including levels of under- or over-fulfillment. (Oliver, 1997 in Hom, 2000)</quote>Both definitions focus on consumer's judgements of a good, assuming that in comparison with some kind of standards, feelings present before consumption, the product/service proved to be a pleasant or disagreeable surprise. E.g. consumer buys a certain brand of yogurts and expects their consumption to be both pleasant and beneficial for his health, but if the positive effects are not perceived by him, disconfirmation occurs and then dissatisfaction. Hom (2000) stresses the importance of referring to consumer and consumption as opposed to customer/buyer, for the latter is not always the one who tries out the product and therefore is not the best suited to be the sole subject of marketing researcher's analysis. For instance it is said that there is a lot of emphasis at present on impact of children will on parents' shopping decisions. The disconfirmation model has been investigated by many researchers and academics, and it is largely agreed that it is based upon an assumption that the level of satisfaction (or dissatisfaction) felt during and after consumption is an end product of a four-step process (Oliver, 1980 in Swan, Trawick, 1981). The initial phase is connected with consumer's expectations (Oliver, 1980 takes into account the case of retail establishments but it seems general enough to use the means of analogy and adapt the theory to any case of consumption).These are beliefs that a product will achieve a certain level of performance on a set of salient attributes. Next step involves consumption of the good and simultaneous or subsequent formation of perceptions concerning performance on the above mentioned attributes. It seems to be debatable though whether only salient attributes are taken into account. It is a truism, but everyone could consider different attributes as the decisive ones in judging the product at hand. For example, age (as a proxy of life experience and wisdom) could make young consumer appreciate greatly a product like average wine, whereas an older and more knowledgeable consumer would be left disappointed because his or her expectations would have been greater. The user can at this stage compare the perceptions of product's performance with previous expectations. East (1997) points out that expectations are not necessarily formed definitely in our minds before consumption, but the experience of using the good may be a stimulus for us to realise what is appropriate in given circumstances, i.e. how the product should perform. It is now possible to state whether the disconfirmation is positive (performance exceeds expectations) and thus likelihood of consumer satisfaction increases, or negative (performance falls below expectations) which implies that likelihood of consumer dissatisfaction increases (Arnould, Price, Zinkhan, 2004). Perceived disconfirmation in the third step of the process can be regarded as determinant of a level of satisfaction with the product and in the final step consumer decides about his or her intentions (customer's anticipation of future behaviour towards a good (Swan, Trawick, 1981) to return to that product. It seems rather useful that the model does not stop at the point of feeling satisfaction, but goes on to the intentions stage, because that is where one can observe actual impact of the consumption-related fulfilment on next shopping decision. However, having certain kind of attitude or intentions formed towards a product may not always imply that we as consumers will actually behave in a given way. Sometimes the consumer, although very positively impressed with e.g. first time purchased exotic fruit will not repurchase it due to its high price. <figure/>East (1997) remarks that in the disconfirmation model the extent of the surprise element is in close relation with the discrepancy between the expectations and the perceived experience. Furthermore satisfaction or dissatisfaction is determined by the importance or value of the purchased good, i.e. the level of involvement (high or low) and it is also affected by perception of the product's performance (as was mentioned above). It means that if a consumer has higher expectations which are met by the product's perceived performance, there is not going to be disconfirmation, but the person feels more satisfaction than in a situation when the initial expectations were low and still the product did not live up to them. It follows from this logical link that companies that promote their produce as something spectacular, boosting up customers' expectations while the product turns out to be rather disappointing, expose the users to a negative disconfirmation (Arnould, Price, Zinkhan, 2004) (e.g. consumer notices that attractively presented store made salad is not as nice as he expected, so the expectation-perceived performance relation leads to dissatisfaction). It is also argued in the literature that customers with only basic expectations are likely to experience more intensive positive disconfirmation than customers requiring more from the same product (Finn, McQuitty, Wiley, 2000). It has been assumed that high involvement purchases causing high arousal are necessary for disconfirmation effect to take place and it may seem that buying fresh food products would not necessarily fulfil these conditions. However, in spite of having lower prices (compared to explicitly expensive and generally high involvement products like cars or holiday trips), it has become an issue of quite high importance in people's lives as eating the right things is deemed necessary to maintain healthy body. What is more, such fresh foods like e.g. fair trade fruit or organic meat go beyond the function of satisfying hunger because they carry a certain kind of ideology or lifestyle, so disconfirmation is possible. It is even probable that the expectations concerning for example organic product could be much higher than a regular equivalent, so the discrepancy between them and actual performance of the product would most probably lead to disconfirmation (either positive or negative) causing satisfaction or dissatisfaction. Some other conditions such as frustration (e.g. with price), dissonance (e.g. the very idea of eating fruit by someone who does not like fruit) may be involved (East, 1997; Zaltman, Wallendorf, 1979). It is essential to emphasize that consumers judge their satisfaction using various external factors which have impact on expectations, i.e. past experiences, comparison with similar products, word of mouth communications, product cues or even cultural background and other various standards and norms etc. (Cadotte, Jenkins, Woodruff, 1987) Even in case of new, unknown products (e.g. free food samples in grocery shops) it is possible to have certain expectations (passive rather than active) based on what the customer can observe about the packaging, response of other users, category of the good (Arnould, Price, Zinkhan, 2004). It must be underlined that consumers judge on basis of their own perceptions (subjective), and those may differ from actual technical attributes. Negative disconfirmation (e.g. when purchased oysters that were seemingly fresh, good quality and appetising turn out to be quite the opposite) is quite likely to lead to dissatisfaction and may result in putting an end to this customer's loyalty, and what is worse- to sharing negative opinions on the product. However it is possible to avoid or at least repair the damage done by negative disconfirmation (and dissatisfaction as a consequence) during the complaint handling process. On the other hand it is argued that positive disconfirmation (e.g. rather low price cheese performs surprisingly beyond our expectations) is not likely to have converse effect, because consumers' loyalty is not believed to set in just after one consumption experience bringing satisfaction (East, 1997). Undoubtedly though such an experience may encourage the person to switch to the satisfying product. It should also be added that consumer's expectations and satisfaction vary and evolve over time due to (amongst others) increased knowledge of the products, and thus manufacturers have good reasons to improve their products. McQuitty, Finn and Wiley (2000) hypothesise also that customers will adapt their expectations as improvements are made, until no disconfirmation exists, which seems to be praiseworthy aspiration for perfection. To sum up, disconfirmation model provides a very useful tool for explaining consumer's satisfaction. Based on different standards and other sources of knowledge, people make constant judgements and comparisons about any kinds of products, including fresh food. Positive disconfirmation is a state that both consumers and producers hope for, but even negative disconfirmation, provided that it is followed by constructive feedback from unsatisfied users, can be beneficial for the company, as long as it understands where the drawbacks are and try to rectify them. 