The molecular mechanisms by which a tumour arises can be arbitrarily divided into two areas; sporadic and familial. Sporadic cancers are the result of random somatic mutations in genes involved in tumour suppression (loss of function mutations) or oncogenesis (gain of function mutations). Familial cancers are the result of inherited genetic mutations that confer on an individual an increased susceptibility to developing cancer. The percentage of colorectal cancer cases that are considered to be familial in origin is in the range of 5-10% (Smith et al., 2002), the remaining 90-95% being the result of sporadic genetic mutations. As a result, the emphasis here will be on the sporadic mutations that exist in colorectal cancers and the suggested mechanisms by which these mutations cause tumours to develop. The three most commonly mutated genes found in human colorectal cancers are; APC (Adenomatous polyposis coli), KRas (viral oncogene homologue) and TP53 (transcription factor p53). Less frequently mutated genes include; PIK3CA (PI 3-kinase), B-Raf (viral oncogene homologue), CTNNB1 (β-Catenin), MSH6 (MutS E. Coli Homologue) and PTEN. The effects of mutations in these genes will be considered in the context of the signalling pathway the gene products are involved in. The three main signalling pathways involved in colorectal cancer are the Wnt Pathway, the Ras/MAPK pathway and the PI3K/PKB pathway, which will each be considered in turn. <heading>Wnt Signalling Pathway</heading>There are three main pathways involving Wnt signalling; the planar cell polarity pathway, the Ca 2+ pathway and the Canonical (β-Catenin) Pathway. This final pathway is the only one associated with colorectal (or any) cancer and will be the only Wnt pathway considered here. The Wnt molecule (gene product of Wnt (name derived from Int-1 + Wg)) is an extracellular glycoprotein that binds 'frizzled' receptors. These receptors are similar to G-protein coupled receptors in terms of structure (both being seven transmembrane spanning receptors) and through the utilisation of G-proteins (Guanine Nucleotide Binding Proteins). However, the frizzle receptors, unlike GPCRs, also require a co-receptor, LRP5/6 (Low density lipoprotein related protein) to transmit the Wnt signal into the cell. The end point of Wnt signalling is the regulation of target gene transcription, this is achieved by a multi protein complex that regulates the phosphorylation (and thereby degradation) of β-Catenin. (Hulsken and Behrens, 2000; Hulsken and Behrens, 2002). In the absence of Wnt signals, β catenin is phosphorylated by CK1α (Caesin Kinase 1), CK1ε and GSK3β (Glycogen synthase kinase 3 β). This induces ubiquitinylation of β Catenin (by β TrCP) which is then degraded in a proteasome. The phosphorylation of β-Catenin occurs within a multi-protein complex, the main scaffold being a dimer composed of Axin (also called conductin). Other proteins within this complex include APC and PP2A (a serine/threonine phosphatase) as well as the three kinases mentioned above (CK1α/ε and GSK3β) (Hulsken and Behrens, 2002). In the presence of Wnt signals, the Dsh (dishevelled) protein inhibits β-Catenin degradation, β-catenin is therefore able to translocate to the nucleus where it interacts with the transcription factor, TCF (T-cell factor, also called LEF), to regulate transcription of target genes. Transcription is activated by association of β-Catenin with CBP (Creb binding protein - histone acetyl transferase) and association of β-Catenin with SWI/SNF (involved in chromatin remodelling) (Hulsken and Behrens, 2002). There are multiple target genes regulated by β-Catenin through this pathway, importantly, c-fos, c-jun, Myc and cyclin D1, all known to possess oncogenic activity. (Hulsken and Behrens, 2000). <heading>APC (Component of the Canonical Pathway)</heading>(Unless stated otherwise, all statistics from hereon are taken from the COSMIC database, Sanger Institute 1,2) APC is a tumour suppressor protein that is commonly mutated in sporadic colorectal cancers. Familial forms also possess mutated APC, such as familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP), the condition in which the APC gene was first identified. The percentage of sporadic colorectal cancers that contain APC mutations is approximately 40% (18/47), the majority of these mutations being mis-sense substitutions (16/47 samples involved missense substitutions). The two main roles of APC include the regulation of β-Catenin activity (by acting as a scaffold protein for the β-Catenin/phosphorylation complex) and the interaction with cytoskeletal proteins (Nathke, 2004). Deregulation of β-Catenin, through APC mutation, leads to an excess of cellular β-Catenin. This, in turn, leads to an increase in TCF regulated transcription which results in increased MYC and cyclin D1 activity. Both MYC and cyclin D1 are involved in cell proliferation and differentiation, therefore, aberrant expression of these molecules could result in a cancerous phenotype (Fodde, 2002). APC may be involved in the cell migration process, as it is seen to accumulate at the plasma membrane in the direction of migration (Nathke et al., 1996). APC may also be involved in maintaining chromosome integrity during mitosis, as it is seen to accumulate around microtubules located at the centromere and kinetochores, (Fodde et al., 2001). Aneuploidy resulting from aberrant APC activity is a possible cause of colorectal cancer. So, the possible mechanisms by which APC mutations could lead to a cancerous phenotype involve increased proliferative potential (through β-Catenin deregulation) and aberrant cytoskeletal function. <heading>β-Catenin (Component of Canonical Pathway</heading>The role of β-Catenin, as has been mentioned above, is to induce the transcription of various target genes, several of which are oncogenic (c-jun, c-fos, cyclin D1 and MYC) (Hulsken and Behrens, 2000). Β-Catenin is seen to be mutated in approximately 7% (167/2381) of colorectal cancer samples, with a fairly even distribution between deletion mutations and mis-sense substitutions. The mutations are non-randomly distributed within the protein, all but six mutations are found at the C-terminal residues (residues 1-50), a strong indication that mutations are encouraging tumour growth or survival, by conferring a survival advantage to the cell. 'Hotspot' mutations include an S45F missense substitution, that is seen in 38 out of 167 samples, and a truncation deletion, A5-A80, that is seen in 15 out of 167 samples. The role of β-Catenin in tumorigenesis is not clear, it is possible that these mutations block β-Catenin degradation and thereby increase the amount of β-Catenin available to induce transcription, (Hulsken and Behrens, 2000). However, a study that investigated the mutation frequency of certain genes in colorectal cancer found CTNNB1 to be mutated in less than 1% (4/464) of colorectal cancer samples. It would be sensible to conclude from these findings that β-Catenin is of minor importance in sporadic colorectal cancer (Luchtenborg et al., 2005). <heading>Ras/MAPK Pathway</heading>This pathway is one of the best characterised signalling pathways and is known to be disrupted in almost every type of cancer. There are two components of this pathway that are considered to play a major role in colorectal tumorigenesis; K-Ras and B-Raf. <heading>K-Ras</heading>K-Ras (Kirsten-Ras) mutations have been located in 22% (8497/38496) of all human cancers and in 30% (3331/10814) of colorectal cancer samples. Wild type K-Ras is a small GTPase located downstream of tyrosine kinase linked receptors, K-ras associates with phospho-tyrosine residues on the intracellular tail of these receptors and transmits the signal into the cell. In the inactive form, GDP (guanine diphosphate) is bound to K-Ras, in the presence of TKR signals, GTP displaces GDP and activates K-Ras. K-Ras then initiates a phosphorylation cascade which serves to amplify and transmit the signal. Raf-1 (e.g. B-Raf) is directly downstream of K-Ras, and is activated by GTP-bound K-ras. Raf-1 then phosphorylates, and thereby activates, MEK (MAPKK), which then phosphorylates and thereby activates MAPK, which then phosphorylates and thereby activates the transcription factors c-fos and c-jun. These transcription factors, as has been mentioned, regulated cell proliferation, cell survival and differentiation. The K-Ras signal is switched off by the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP by the intrinsic GTPase activity of K-Ras (Colicelli, 2004; Wenner et al., 2005). Activated Ras, through mutation, leads to increased Raf/MEK/MAPK signalling and therefore deregulation of proliferation and survival. These processes are the cornerstone of tumorigenesis, which is why deregulation of this pathway is observed in many tumours. The mutations determined in K-Ras are clearly non-randomly distributed, with the majority being clustered around residues G12 and G13, and almost no mutations beyond G13. <heading>B-Raf</heading>B-Raf is a commonly mutated oncogene that signals downstream of Ras. Mutations in B-Raf are found in approximately 15% (477/3195) of human colorectal cancers and are non-randomly distributed. All mutations are located within the kinase domain (kinase domain comprises residues 458-722), all but one of the mutations being mis-sense substitutions. A 'hotspot' mutation, V600E, is seen in 445 out of the 477 samples containing mutations in the B-Raf gene, strongly suggesting that this alteration is producing an oncogenic effect. Constitutive B-Raf activation, through mutation, is likely to produce effects similar to constitutive K-Ras activation, as both proteins signal along the same pathway (Davies et al., 2002). <heading>PI 3-kinase/PKB Pathway</heading>PI 3-kinase (phosphoinositide 3-kinase) is a lipid kinase that functions downstream of tyrosine kinase linked receptors (TKRs). The lipid second messenger molecules produced by PI 3-kinase (phosphatidylinosititol -3,4,5- trisphosphate) are involved in the regulation of cell motility, cell survival and cell cycle control. The various effector enzymes of the PI 3-kinase pathway include PKB (protein kinase B, also called Akt) and the Rho family of GTPases (Katso et al., 2001) PI3K is a now known to play a major role in tumour progression (Samuels and Velculescu, 2004). Mutated forms of the p110α/p85 isoform of PI 3-kinase have been discovered in 24% (94/389) of colorectal cancer samples. Activated mutants of p110α/ p85 are able to drive tumour development through increased cell proliferation and survival, and by inducing cytoskeletal changes, by increasing the activation levels of effector proteins (such as PKB and Rho). As with the other pathways considered above, this pathway involves multiple cell signalling components that are commonly mutated in colorectal cancer. These include the TKRs (e.g. platelet derived growth factor receptor), the Ras oncogene, and the PTEN tumour suppressor protein. PTEN negatively regulates PI 3-kinase activity (by dephosphorylating phosphatidylinositol -3,4,5- trisphosphate ) and is found to be mutated in 9% (24/272) of colorectal cancer samples (Katso et al., 2001). <heading>p53</heading>p53 is the most commonly mutated gene in human cancers, over 40% (362/840) of human cancers involve p53 mutations, with a slightly higher percentage of p53 mutations observed in colorectal cancer (46%, 22/47). p53 is a tumour suppressor gene, often termed the 'guardian of the genome', as it plays a major role in maintaining DNA integrity. Loss of p53 function, through mutation, renders a cell more vulnerable to DNA damage and therefore more likely to develop a cancerous phenotype (Jin and Levine, 2001). Mutations in p53, as with the other signalling components considered here, are non-random, the majority of them occurring in the DNA binding domain (residues 103-292). In colorectal cancer, loss of p53 function is predicted to occur as a final stage in tumour formation, after APC and K-ras mutations have occurred, (known as Vogelstein-Fearon model) (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990) So it can be seen that there are multiple mechanisms by which colorectal cancer can arise sporadically. Three main pathways are involved, each of which involves multiple components that are known to be mutated in colorectal cancer. Loss of p53 function is a major contributor to all cancer types and is no less important in sporadic colorectal cancer formation. 