Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted signalling molecule integral to the patterning of the early vertebrate embryo. Shh is a mammalian homologue of Hh (Hedgehog), a signalling molecule present in Drosophila Melanogaster (invertebrate), where it is also seen to play a vital role in embryogenesis. Other mammalian Hh homologues include Indian Hedgehog (Ihh) and Desert Hedgehog (Dhh). The fact that the Shh molecule itself, and the functional pathway through which Shh operates, are both seen to be well conserved throughout vertebrates and invertebrates, suggests that this signalling molecule is of the utmost importance to the correct patterning of embryos during development. Much of the functional information available for Shh has been elucidated from work on D. Melanogaster, fortunately, a lot of this information is applicable and relevant to vertebrates, as a result, much is known about the distribution and function of Shh within mammals. Shh function can be divided into two areas; specification of neuronal progenitor cells and control of proliferation and survival of neural cells. The role of Shh in progenitor cell specification (and therefore the main role of Shh in development) will be the main focus here. Shh directs the morphology and organisation of the developing embryo by ensuring the correct fate of neural progenitor cells (undifferentiated cells that will develop into highly specialised cells of the central nervous system (CNS), such as motor neurons, interneurons or glial cells). Shh is seen to play a major role in the dorsoventral patterning of the neural tube (Echelard et al., 1993; Ho and Scott, 2002), oligodendrocyte specification, eye patterning (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002) , anterior-posterior patterning of the limbs (Riddle et al., 1993; Marti and Bovolenta, 2002) and induction of the ventral somites (the longitudinal segments of the vertebrate body) (Johnson et al., 1994; Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). Proliferative and survival roles of Shh include, neural stem cell proliferation, neuronal cell survival and glial cell survival (Ho and Scott, 2002). The basic mechanism by which Shh directs cell fate is common to many of these different functions, and as has been said, is also seen to be shared between the vertebrates and invertebrates. The mechanisms of Shh that are common to different functions will be discussed first, followed by a look at more specific mechanisms of Shh action, such as the specific way by which this signalling molecule directs dorsoventral patterning of the neural tube. As Shh is a secreted protein, a secretory cell is of course required. These secretory cells, specialised to produce, modify and release Shh appropriately, have been located in several areas of the developing embryo, the main regions being the floor plate of the neural tube and the notochord (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). The neural tube is formed from ectodermal tissue (the outer layer of the three layers of germ cells of the developing embryo) and develops into the CNS (that is, the spinal cord and brain). The floor plate of this neural tube is also ectodermal in origin and is derived from the neural plate, the neural plate being a 'plate' of thickened ectodermal tissue located along the dorsal midline of the early embryo. The notochord is a longitudinal arrangement of cells that forms the supporting axis of the body in chordates (which includes vertebrates). In the higher vertebrates, such as mammals, the notochord is obliterated by the vertebrae as they develop. The presence of Shh in these areas of the embryo clearly implicate it in playing an important role in the development of the embryo. Other areas in which Shh has been located include the early gut endoderm (the inner most of the three layers of germ cells of the embryo), oligodendrocytes (a type of glial cell), the limb buds and the Hensen node (a feature found in bird embryos) (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). The Shh signalling molecule is the result of several post translational modifications of a larger precursor protein. After signal sequence cleavage following translation, the Shh precursor is approximately 45kDa in size, consisting of 462 amino acids (human homologue) (Marigo et al., 1995). This precursor then undergoes autocatalytic cleavage, which involves the molecule catalysing the breakage of a covalent bond within its own primary structure. The resulting fragments include a 25kDa C terminal molecule and a 20 kDa N terminal molecule (Porter et al., 1996). (The size of the N terminal molecule has been reported to be 20kDa (Porter et al., 1996), 19kDa (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002) and 22kDa (Ho and Scott, 2002)). This N terminal molecule is the active signalling molecule, further modifications include the addition of lipid groups, such as a cholesterol group covalently attached to the C terminal or a palmitoyl group covalently attached to the N terminal (Ho and Scott, 2002; Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). The 25kDa C terminal fragment is responsible for both the autocatalytic cleavage and the lipid modifications (Porter et al., 1996), and, although it is secreted, it does is not seen to function as a signalling molecule (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). The cholesterol group attached to the C terminal of the signalling component has been suggested to regulate Shh activity by limiting or enhancing the movement of Shh though certain tissues. The N terminal palmitoylation is an essential modification for Shh function in vertebrates (Ho and Scott, 2002). As has been alluded to, the mechanism by which secreted Shh ilicits a response in a target cell is common to several different roles of Shh. The main components of the Shh signalling pathway are Patched (PTC) and Smoothened (SMO), both homologues of membrane spanning cell surface proteins present in D. melanogaster. In the absence of Shh, PTC (consisting of 12 transmembrane domains) binds and inhibits SMO, a protein consisting of 7 transmembrane domains. The binding of Shh to it's receptor, PTC, relieves the inhibition PTC exerts of SMO and hence SMO is able to transmit the Shh signal into the cell. A further action of PTC is to restrict Shh movement are thereby affect Shh distribution, a mechanism by which to regulate Shh activity (Chen and Struhl, 1996; Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). Other components of the Shh pathway that interact at the cell surface include the hedgehog interacting protein (HIP) and vitronectin. HIP, a transmembrane glycoprotein, reduces the Shh signal by binding Shh at the cell surface and thus reducing the amount available to bind PTC. Vitronectin (also called serum spreading factor) is an extra cellular matrix glycoprotein which also binds Shh, but unlike HIP, vitronectin increases Shh activity (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). The mechanism by which SMO is able to regulate expression of Shh target genes is not fully understood. Three members of the Ci/GLi family of zinc finger transcription factors, GLi1-3, are the end point regulators (either activation or repression) of target genes, specific examples of target genes will be considered below. As is often seen with the Shh pathway, the GLi transcription factors are homologous to proteins found in D. Melanogaster, in this case, the Ci protein (Cubitus interruptus). Interestingly, in D. Melanogaster, the Ci transcription factor regulates transcription of the PTC gene, encoding one of the proteins that regulates the activity of the transcription factor itself (Shin et al., 1999). Other components involved in the Shh pathway include protein kinase A (which inhibits Shh action), Fused protein (a Serine/Threonine kinase) and Suppressor of Fused protein. The protein, Costal-2, interacts with the Fused and Suppressor of fused proteins, but has only been identified in invertebrates. This complex, of Fused, Suppressor of Fused and Costal-2 are involved in the process of translocating the Ci/GLi transcription factors between the cytoplasm (where they interact with, and are activated by, SMO) and the nucleus (where they regulate gene expression) (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). The role of Shh signalling in dorsoventral patterning will now be considered, as an example of how the common pathway described above can be modified to produce a diverse set of results. In the early embryo, neuronal progenitor cell fate needs to be carefully regulated in order to produce a fully functional CNS. Shh, secreted from the notochord and floor plate, regulates cell fate through a concentration gradient system. Progenitor cells of the neural tube detect the level of Shh and respond appropriately. Responses could involve differentiation of progenitor cells, either into motor neurons (efferent or effector neurons) or interneurons (connecting neurons) (Ericson et al., 1996; Ho and Scott, 2002). The specific responses of neuronal progenitor cells to Shh levels are brought about by the regulation (activation or repression) of gene expression of a variety of homeobox containing transcription factors. A homeobox is a protein domain, consisting of approximately 60 residues, that regulates a certain gene by recognising and binding to a specific DNA sequence within the gene. Homeodomain proteins regulated by Shh signals include Pax 6 (a member of the paired-box family), Irx 3 (a member of the Iroquois family), Dbx 1 and Dbx2 (members of the DEAD box family), which are grouped into Class I, as they share the common feature of being expressed in the absence of Shh. Class II homeodomain proteins include Nkx 2.2 and Nkx 6.1, which are expressed in the presence of Shh signals (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). The combination of expression of these various transcription factors defines five distinct regions of the ventral neural tube in which specific cell types are produced. These regions remain distinct through the mutual repression observed between transcription factors in neighbouring regions. By establishing these distinct domains, Shh signals are responsible for playing a major role in organising the early patterning of the ventral CNS. The role of Shh described above is the best characterised role for Shh in the CNS, and possibly the most important. However, Shh is involved in other developmental processes, such as the late development of the dorsal CNS, (although the exact role it plays here is less clear). In the dorsal region, Shh is considered to play a role in inducing proliferation of progenitor granule cells, and so here, Shh is undertaking a different role to that of directing ventral patterning, as in this case, Shh is acting as a mitogen and not as a director of cell fate (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). Shh is also known to play a role in determining oligodendrocyte cell fate. Oligodendrocyte precursor cells require Shh signals in order to differentiate and these precursors are seen to only originate from areas of CNS that involve Shh signalling. The fact that oligodendrocyte differentiation occurs at a later stage of embryogenesis and requires similar levels Shh to induce this differentiation, suggests that oligodendrocytes and differentiated ventral neurons share a common precursor. A role for Shh in observed in the eye, where Shh is considered to be involved in the development of the optic cup, regulation of proliferation and differentiation of retinal precursor cells and some aspects of cell movement, such as growth cone control (control of the motile tips of growing neurons) and neural crest cell migration (Marti and Bovolenta, 2002). Shh is also required to ensure cell survival of neuronal progenitor cells (neuroepithelial cells) during early development. PTC induces apoptotic cell death in the absence of Shh signals, so in the early embryo Shh is required for the control of cell fate and to block the pro-apoptotic signal conveyed by PTC into the cells (Thibert et al., 2003). So it can be seen that as well as playing a major role in patterning the ventral CNS during early embryogenesis, Shh signalling is also needed for aspects of later embryogenesis, (such as neuroepithelial cell survival and dorsal CNS patterning), organogenesis (such as the eye) and is also involved in oligodendrocyte cell differentiation. The role of Shh in these integral aspects of embryogenesis, as well as the distinct concentration gradient mechanism by which Shh signals, would justify describing Sonic hedgehog as the archetype of developmental signalling molecules. 