The human estrogen receptor is part of the Nuclear Receptor super family. The characteristic mechanism of these intracellular receptors is to bind their ligand, forming a ligand-receptor complex, which then acts as a transcription factor altering gene expression appropriately. The estrogen receptor (ERα) is located in the nucleus, in close proximity to the site of DNA action. The estrogen molecule, being small and lipophilic, is able to diffuse in to the cell and bind to the estrogen receptor. The binding of estrogen to ERα induces the dissociation of the multiple chaperone proteins that are associated with the inactivated ERα. (The function of the chaperone proteins is to ensure the unbound ER does not function without estrogen activation. Hsp90 is an example of a heat shock chaperone protein (1)). The ERα then changes conformation which allows it to dimerise with another activated ERα, it can then bind to specific sites on the DNA (2). The binding of the ERα dimer to the DNA is specific, it binds to estrogen response elements (EREs) which are specific palindromic sequences in the DNA. The DNA bound ERα dimer recruits transcription factor proteins (cofactors) that positively regulate gene expression, these proteins are called co-activators (3). These characteristics; of ligand binding, receptor dimerisation and DNA binding are functions of the protein that are made possible through its specific structure. The human estrogen receptor is only found in certain cells, activation of this receptor leads to the production of proteins involved in many different processes in both males and females. In women the processes include ovulation, implantation, pregnancy maintenance, childbirth and lactation, and in men the ERα is required for normal testicular function. The activated ERα is also involved in other processes such as the cardiovascular system, the immune system, the central nervous system, humoral immune response, bone remodeling and mineralocorticoid effect (2). The primary structure of the ERα consists of 247 amino acids, between amino acids 307 and 552 (5). The secondary structure consists of 1 beta sheet, 2 beta strands, 11 alpha helices, 17 beta turns, 2 gamma turns, 1 beta bulge and 1 beta hairpin. The beta sheet consists of 2 strands that run antiparallel, strand 1 runs from the 401 to the 406 position and strand 2 runs from the 408 to the 411 position. Of the 11 alpha helices, 2 are 3.10 helices and the remaining 9 are alpha helices. The number of amino acids per helix ranges from 3 (for the 3.10 helices) to 30. The 17 beta turns are all 4 amino acids in length and are either type I or IV turns. The 2 gamma turns are both 3 amino acids in length and are inverse turns. The bulge in the beta strand is of the classic type. The beta hairpin consists of 2 antiparallel beta strands, one running from amino acid 401 to 405, and the second running from amino acid 408 to 411 (5). Figure 1 shows the overall tertiary structure of the 247 amino acid estrogen receptor monomer. It has one binding domain and the bound ligand (4-hydroxytamoxifen) is shown in green. The alpha helices are shown in the diagram in purple and the two beta strands in yellow. It is described by the CATH system as mainly alpha orthogonal bundle (6). The CATH code is 1.10.656.10, the classification [1] is mainly alpha, and is based on the secondary structure of the domain. The architecture [1.10] is orthogonal bundle and describes the overall structure of the domain determined by the orientations of the secondary structures. The topology [1.10.656] is of the Retinoid X Receptor, members of this family have similar overall shapes and connectivity of secondary structures. The homologous super family [1.10.656.10] is the Retinoid X Receptor super family, proteins in this family are believed to share a common ancestor. Two important structures in the protein are the zinc fingers. These zinc fingers are involved in recognition of the ERE and in spatial arrangement of the dimerised receptor along the DNA. The zinc fingers each consist of a zinc atom at the centre of a tetrahedron of four cysteine residues (4). The fingers form alpha helices that combine to form a large, globular, hydrophobic domain, joined by the one beta sheet present in the protein. Each zinc finger has a specific function, the proximal finger (i.e. the one nearest the target gene) is responsible for recognition of the DNA binding site, whereas the distal finger is responsible for the correct binding of each unit of the dimer (1). Figure 2 shows the homodimeric quarternary structure of the estrogen receptor. The estrogen receptor dimer is the biological unit that binds to the DNA to regulate gene expression. The dimerisation interface involves residues from helix H8 up to H11, (for clarity of description the 11 alpha helices of the protein are assigned an H number, H1 to H11). The most important contact surface involves the H10 helix, which binds to the other monomer through a hydrophobic leucine zipper-like interaction, and hydrophilic interactions involving direct hydrogen bonding with water molecules (7). These alpha helices, and the dimeric form of the ERα itself, are an important structural feature, as the dimeric form of the ERα reflects the pallindromic nature of the ERE (4). The natural ligand that binds to the estrogen receptor is 17β-estradiol, this molecule binds to the single binding domain in the protein. The domain is completely shielded from the external environment and is highly hydrophobic, it is mainly defined by 22 amino acid residues (7). The hydrophobic nature of the domain is essential for the binding of 17β-estradiol as this molecule is lipophilic and would not be able to bind to a hydrophilic domain. Whilst 17β-estradiol is an agonist of the ERα, molecules such as Tamoxifen and Raloxifen act as partial antagonists (also called partial anti-estrogens) (7). These synthetic anti-estrogens allow receptor dimerisation and DNA binding but the overall effect on the tissue or cell is greatly reduced when compared to the effects 17β-estradiol bound ERα has on a tissue. A full anti-estrogen prevents receptor dimerisation and therefore DNA binding. The ERα ultimately regulates gene expression through a co-activating complex. Co-activators are the link between the DNA bound receptor and the general transcription factors (1). The co-activators associated with the ERα include the CBP/p300 component, the function of which is to modify the structure of chromatin, in preparation for transcription (4). So it can be seen that the ERα has many specialised structural features that are essential in order for the ERα to carry out its vital role in the cell. These features allow the receptor to bind a lipophilic ligand, recognize a specific DNA sequence, dimerise and finally to bind co-activator proteins that have the end result of altering gene expression, which is the ultimate goal of the ERα. <figure/><figure/>