<heading>1. Introduction</heading>The use of water for nursery irrigation is predicted to be a crucial issue for ornamental industry over the next decade. Increased water cost and decreased availability are almost certain to occur. Some European countries, mostly from the Mediterranean zone, have experienced significant water shortages and in many cases demand for water exceeds supply. As a result, ornamental producers must learn to manage effectively this invaluable natural source. Undoubtedly, the implementation of effective irrigation management techniques is the most essential step for the accomplishment of irrigation water use efficiency. <heading>2. Water conserving practices </heading>According to Garber et al. , (2002: 730), the most important practices to conserve water used in container nurseries are: <quote>"water recycling, irrigating when needed and for the minimum required time, use of drip or sub-irrigation instead of overhead irrigation, watering in the morning hours to minimize loss of water due to evaporation, watering based on plant requirement and not based on preset frequency, use of cyclic irrigation, arrangement of containers (such as grouping by size), altering growing media (including wetting agents), use of cyclic irrigation and timely repair irrigation system leaks." </quote><heading>3. Runoff collection</heading>Runoff collection and reuse is one of the major principles of efficient water management use. Reuse of captured runoff water may ideally reduce fresh water consumption during production of nursery crops. As Beeson et al. (2004), point out, modern laws and regulations in U.S.A. require reduction of fresh underground water or public surface waters used by nurseries. Stricter regulations are also currently limit nutrient concentration in water leaving nurseries (nursery runoff). The construction of runoff collection and storage basins is strongly recommended to deal with the requirements of these regulations because the reuse of irrigation waters reduces the volume of fresh water used for irrigation and limits the release of nutrients and pesticides to the environment. On the other hand, recycling of runoff concentrates soluble salts, increasing salinity to levels that irrigation water is unacceptable for ornamental production. Constructed wetlands (gravel or bog wetlands for the filtration of nursery runoff water) may provide a simple, low technology method for reducing nutrient concentrations and improving runoff water quality. A study by Arnold et al. (2004: 217) indicates that "a single pass of nursery runoff through constructed wetlands substantially reduced nitrogen concentrations without increasing salinity. Nevertheless, constant recycling of water through constructed wetlands may increase soluble salts to levels that require subcanopy application of irrigation for effective crop production". The same study shows that overhead irrigation method had negative impact on nursery crops when recycling water was used. The damage obviously caused due to high salt concentrations in irrigation water contacting the foliage. In any case recycled water must be carefully managed in order to avoid foliage damage of crops. Moreover, according to Garber et al. (2002), grass strips can be used to reduce nutrient transfer to collection basins. In some cases also, recycled water must be treated by acid injection to control pH. <heading>4. Irrigation systems</heading><heading>4.1 Overhead and trickle systems</heading>Irrigation systems are also very essential for the efficient use of water. Overhead irrigation is the most common form of nursery irrigation. It is a flexible and cheap method. The volume of water can flexibly be adjusted and for this reason the ground does not have to be specially graded. However, overhead irrigation systems are inefficient in terms of water use. For example, the area where an overhead irrigation system applies water is not totally covered by pots. Therefore, one part of the applied water falls on the ground. Also, the whole area must be watered long enough to ensure that the least well watered plants receive adequate water. Colangelo et al. (2001), point out that trickle irrigation can significantly increase water application efficiency when compared with overhead irrigation, because water is delivered directly to the medium. Cyclic micro-irrigation in trickle systems also has been shown to increase water use efficiency in container production systems compared with non cyclic systems. In cyclic irrigation, plant's daily water allotments are divided into a series of application events throughout the day. <heading>4.2 Capillary irrigation</heading>A research carried out by Goodwin et al. (2003), shows that capillary irrigation is more efficient in terms of water use, compared with drip and overhead irrigation. On the other hand, the electrical conductivity of medium (EC) in overhead watering is more evenly distributed in relation to both drip and capillary irrigation. This study indicates also that plants grown with capillary irrigation have sparse roots near the upper surface of the mix, due to higher EC in the surface layers of the pots. Therefore, shallow-rooted plants do not indicate optimum growth in capillary systems, especially when fertilizer is applied on the surface of the mix. Finally, this research shows that for optimum growth in capillary systems, especially for shallow-rooted plants, we need to use controlled-release fertilizer which must be mixed through the medium. <heading>4.3 Ebb and flow benches & sand beds</heading>Sub-irrigation systems, such as ebb and flow benches and sand beds, are very water efficient in relation to overhead irrigation, using 20% or less of the water of an overhead system. This is mostly due to the fact that almost all the water supplied is potentially available to the plants. Although, sub-irrigation systems have been researched for decades, they are not broadly adopted because of weed growth, algae growth and plant rooting into the bed. However, Zheng et al. (2004), point out that the major drawback of this technique is the salt accumulation at the substrate surface. Sub-irrigation results in a significant accumulation of salts within the top third of plant growth substrate. In order to avoid phytotoxic salt accumulation in sub-irrigated crops, a reduction in fertilizer concentrations would be necessary. Zheng et  al. (2004), suggest that macronutrient concentrations used by greenhouse growers can be significantly reduced without having any negative effect on growth and quality. The same research indicates that if substrate pH levels can be adequately maintained under lower EC conditions and lower fertilizer application rates, it may be possible to reduce fertilization without reducing crop production. However, if the nutrient level is too low, nutrient deficiency, such as N and K, may occur. Fe deficiency is also very likely to occur in very low nutrient concentrations, mostly due to elevated pH levels of growth substrates. Obviously, we need to find a balance between providing adequate nutrients and reducing the potential for phytotoxic salt accumulation. The reduction also of nutrient concentrations, without reducing crop production and quality, is crop dependent. It is finally very important to redistribute nutrient salts to the lower sections of the pot by using periodically overhead fertigation. <heading>4.4 Plant-demand based irrigation</heading>'Plant-demand based' irrigation management strategies are under development to provide solutions to the problems of water use efficiency. This technology tries to determine the water requirements of crops by using substrate moisture sensors and irrigation models based on reference evapotranspiration. However, commercial availability of these options is very poor (Beeson et al., 2004). <heading>5. Potential commercial impact of water efficient management strategies</heading><heading>5.1 Commercial impact of the reuse of runoff water</heading>According to Beeson et al. (2004), the use of recycled water has dramatically increased the presence of root rot in some container nurseries, due to high salt concentrations. Additionally, since the land area for most nurseries is frequently limited (a majority of nurseries are located within the influence of urban centers), the construction of collection and storage basins is uneconomical in many areas. Furthermore, the construction structures for water collection must be overlaid with waterproof materials increasing costs significantly. Finally, treatments for the improvement of runoff water quality (construction of wetlands, filtration and control of pathogens) are an important part of recirculation cost. On the other hand, as availability of water from public surface waters and groundwater declines, nurseries will adopt methods and technologies to increase water use efficiency. The adoption of collection basins, micro-irrigation and sub-irrigation from the larger nurseries is undoubtedly of major importance. <heading>5.2 Commercial impact of water efficient irrigation systems</heading>It is worth mentioning that water efficient irrigation systems have several other economical and environmental benefits besides lower water requirements. Lower nutrient requirements (because of reduced nutrient leaching), disease prevention (from foliage wetting), weeds prevention (from over watering of substrates), improved plant quality (controlled growth, uniform plants), fewer plant losses (from over or under watering), flexibility in pot sizing and spacing, savings in labor (for hand watering), and reduction of nutrients runoff to surrounding ecosystems are some of the benefits (Zheng et al. 2004). Recirculating sub-irrigation can become increasingly popular in the greenhouse industry. Zheng et al. (2004), claim that lower nutrient requirements in recirculating sub-irrigation systems can lead to significant fertilizer savings. Sub-irrigation also delivers nutrients to pots in a uniform manner, improving crop appearance and uniformity which are very desirable in ornamental production. Moreover, a study by O'Neill and McQuilken (2000), indicates that ornamental crops grown with reduced leaf wetness are less infected from grey mould (Botrytis cinerea), which is a very common disease in ornamental greenhouse crops. The same study indicated also that both drip and overhead irrigation create favorable conditions for botrytis. Overhead irrigation causes leaf wetness due to direct contact of water with plant canopy which is extremely advantageous to botrytis infection. Drip irrigation also creates humid microclimate in the plant canopy, especially in the plant base, sufficient to permit botrytis infection. On the other head, sub-irrigation creates unfavorable conditions to fungi infections, so that it can be a useful tool for reducing disease risk and adopting integrated management of grey mould in ornamental greenhouse plants. <heading>6. Conclusion</heading>Many solutions about water conservation have already been researched and have been proved to be advantageous for both the environment and greenhouse industry. Recycling the nursery runoff water for irrigation has benefits in using a resource that would otherwise be discarded and wasted. Thus, using recycled water reduces the pressures on the environment by reducing the use of environmental waters. There are factors that need to be considered, including the cost of recirculation of runoff water and salinity. Moreover, application methods and irrigation systems can be further controlled providing more efficient use of water. Ongoing research and development will also improve and increase the use of sub-irrigation systems which are very water conserving. <heading>8. AppendixAbstracts </heading><heading>1. A comparison of subcanopy versus overhead application of constructed wetland treated nursery runoff on short and long rotation  nursery crops. </heading>The nursery/greenhouse industry is the fastest growing segment of US agriculture. Consumer demand for excellent product quality requires luxury applications of water and agricultural chemicals. These cultural practices tend to yield significant volumes of runoff rich in nutrients and pesticides. A capture and recycle system at the Nursery/Floral Crops Research and Education Center at Texas A&M University was fitted with 12 gravel filtration sub-surface flow (SSF) and 12 bog-like free-surface flow (FSF) wetland cells. Three cells of each type were planted with Canna x generalis 'Cherry Red', Iris x 'Clyde Redmond', both species, or no wetland plants. Runoff was continually collected from the nursery and recycled through wetland cells prior to application via overhead impact sprinklers or subcanopy microsprinklers. Short-term (10 weeks) differential effects between overhead and subcanopy irrigation during production of Fraxinus pennsylvanica, Pistacia chinensis, Quercus virginiana and Taxodium distichum in 9.4-litre (#3) containers or Ilex vomitoria 'Nana' and Catharanthus roseus in 5.8-litre (#2) containers were limited in magnitude. However, overhead irrigation reduced height and caliper growth or injured the foliage compared to plants irrigated with subcanopy microsprinklers during longer-term (14 months) production in large 87.9-litre (#27) containers. The extent of reduction was species dependent with Pinus elliottii being minimally impacted, Pyrus calleryana 'Bradford' intermediate, and Lagerstroemia x 'Basham's Party Pink' (purportedly a Lagerstroemia indica x Lagerstroemia fauriei hybrid) and T. distichum exhibiting more pronounced effects. Damage appeared to be largely a result of high dissolved salt concentrations in irrigation water contacting the foliage. Recycling of runoff through the FSF cells concentrated soluble salts more so than passing the water through the SSF cells. Efficacy of nitrate nitrogen removal varied with species, season, loading rate and wetland type. However, the constructed wetland s were generally effective under our test conditions at maintaining effluent nitrate levels at <=10 mg/litre (10 ppm) when loading rates were <=50 mg/litre (50 ppm). Presence of emergent wetland plants (those with roots imbedded in the substrate and shoots extending above the water surface, rather than floating or submerged plants) in the system was more important for effectively reducing nitrate levels in effluent from SSF than from FSF cells. <heading>2. Strategic vision of container nursery irrigation in the next ten years. </heading>Visions of the future for container nursery irrigation were collected from 12 nursery irrigation scientists, growers and nursery organization leaders. The amount of water available for nursery irrigation unanimously is forecasted to decline over the next decade. Along with declining availability, the cost of water for irrigation is predicted to increase substantially for most nurseries. Limited availability, higher direct cost, and irrigation runoff issues are projected to compel the container nursery industry to adopt procedures and technology that will increase irrigation water use efficiency. Evidence in support of these prognoses, current solutions and suggested options are discussed. <heading>3. Nitrate leaching beneath a containerized nursery crop receiving trickle or overhead irrigation. </heading>Container production of nursery crops is intensive and a potential source of nitrogen release to the environment. This study was conducted to determine if trickle irrigation could be used by container nursery producers as an alternative to standard overhead irrigation to reduce nitrogen release into the environment. The effect of overhead irrigation and trickle irrigation on leachate nitrate N concentration, flow-weighted nitrate N concentration, leachate volume, and plant growth was investigated using containerized rhododendron (Rhododendron catawbiense Michx. 'Album') supplied with a controlled-release fertilizer and grown outdoors on top of soil-monolith lysimeters. Leachate was collected over two growing seasons and overwinter periods, and natural precipitation was allowed as a component of the system. Precipitation accounted for 69% of the water entering the overhead-irrigated system and 80% of the water entering the trickle-irrigated system. Leachate from fertilized plants exceeded the USEPA limit of 10 mg L-1 at several times and reached a maximum of 26 mg L-1 with trickle irrigation. Average annual loss of nitrate N in leachate for fertilized treatments was 51.8 and 60.5 kg ha-1 for the overhead and trickle treatments, respectively. Average annual flow-weighted concentration of nitrate N in leachate of fertilized plants was 7.2 mg L-1 for overhead irrigation and 12.7 mg L-1 for trickle irrigation. Trickle irrigation did not reduce the amount of nitrate N leached from nursery containers when compared with overhead irrigation because precipitation nullified the potential benefits of reduced leaching fractions and irrigation inputs provided under trickle irrigation. <heading>4. Survey of container nursery irrigation practices in Georgia. </heading>A 2001 survey of 102 nurseries that were members of the Georgia Green Industry Association was conducted to assess irrigation practices of container ornamental nurseries. Mean nursery size was 64 acres (26 ha) and mean annual revenue was approximately $3 million. Approximately 50% of the irrigation water was from wells and the other 50% came from surface sources, such as collection basins. Irrigation in smaller containers, including #1, #3 and #5, was applied primarily by overhead methods, while larger containers (#7, #15 and #25) made extensive use of direct application methods, such as drip or spray stakes. Frequency of irrigation in the summer growing months was about three times that of the winter season. Georgia nurseries use irrigation practices suggested in Southern Nursery Association best management practices, including collection of runoff water (48%), cyclic irrigation (44%), watering in the morning (92%), and grass strips between the production beds and drainage areas (60%). <heading>5. Efficiency of water and nutrient use in containerised plants irrigated by overhead , drip or capillary irrigation. </heading>This paper reports an assessment of the potential of an irrigation system based on capillary matting in comparison to the industry standard, overhead irrigation, and to drip irrigation, for plants growing in pots. The systems were evaluated on the basis of the dry weights of the plants grown, water-use efficiency (volume of runoff) and the environmental impact of the systems. The environmental impact was assessed by the volumes of runoff and the amounts of nitrate nitrogen and phosphate phosphorus in the runoff. Rose (Rosa) cv. Flower Carpet and tomato cv. Apollo grew on capillary mat as large as or larger than (dry weight) with drip or overhead irrigation when controlled-release fertilizer (Osmocote Plus, 5-6 month release) was mixed through the medium. Lavender (Lavandula dentata) and pansy (Viola tricolor (1997) and V. wittrockiana cv. Blue Angel (1998)) showed no significant difference between the irrigation systems. However, when the fertilizer was applied to the surface or in the dibble hole, pansy, dianthus (Dianthus barbatus) cv. Gemfire, and anisodontea (Anisodontea capensis) grew larger with overhead than with capillary irrigation. The volumes of water used by the drip and capillary systems were about equal at 2.6 and 3.3 l/pot per week, respectively, as were the volumes of runoff produced, 0.43 and 0.39 l/pot per week, but both were far lower than the corresponding values for the overhead system, where water use was 7.13 l/pot per week, and the runoff 3.00 l/pot per week. At the end of the trial, plants grown with capillary irrigation had a high electrical conductivity in the surface layers of the pots when controlled-release fertilizer was either mixed evenly through (1997, EC 2.04 dS/m) or was applied to the top of the mix (1998, EC 0.87 dS/m). On the other hand, with overhead watering the EC was more evenly distributed (1997, EC range 0.30-0.36 dS/m) or highest at the bottom of the pot (1998, EC 0.97 dS/m). The concentrations of nutrients in the runoff from the capillary mat system, nitrate nitrogen 6.2 mg/l and phosphate phosphorus 0.12 mg/l, were lower than those for either of the other systems, overhead giving 9.7 and 0.49 mg/l and drip 11.5 and 0.49 mg/l of nitrogen and phosphorus, respectively. Thus, capillary irrigation gave more efficient water and nutrient use and reduced nutrient contamination of the environment compared with the drip or overhead irrigation systems. <heading>6. Influence of irrigation method on development of grey  mould (Botrytis cinerea) in greenhouse crops of calluna, cyclamen and primula. </heading>Experiments were carried out during 1997-2000 in Scotland, the UK, to study the use of irrigation as a potential component of an integrated disease management system. On calluna cuttings cultivar Sun Rise, irrigation was applied using hand-watering from overhead or sub-irrigation using capillary sandbeds, and on calluna plants cultivar Flamingo by overhead watering by a sprinkler, sub-irrigation using capillary sandbeds, dripline irrigation at 100 ml/plant and dripline irrigation at 200 ml/plant. Overhead watering by hand and sub-irrigation by filling a 1-cm deep reservoir in a plastic tray were applied to cyclamen plants cultivar Sierra White. Overhead sprayline irrigation with pots stood on capillary matting and sub-irrigation using seep-hoses laid over capillary matting were used on primula plants cultivar Danova. On calluna, foliar symptoms were significantly reduced when plants were watered by sub-irrigation. On cyclamen, disease incidence on leaves was not affected by an irrigation method. However, a significant disease reduction was associated with sub-irrigation on leaves at mid-canopy level towards the crop maturity stage. An irrigation method had no effect on primula. Different effects of irrigation on B. cinerea development were related to primary infection routes of the disease. Sub-irrigation reduced disease risk when infection occurred at upper or mid-canopy levels, but not when disease originated on leaves at the compost level. <heading>7. Potted gerbera production in a subirrigation system using low-concentration nutrient solutions. </heading>To determine whether currently used commercial nutrient solution concentrations can be reduced during the final stage (last 4-5 weeks) of production of potted gerbera (Gerbera jamesonii cv. 'Shogun') under recirculating subirrigation conditions, plants were grown under one of 4 nutrient levels (10%, 25%, 50%, and 100% of full strength). Nutrient concentration levels did not affect leaf area, flower number and appearance, and plant total dry weight. There were no significant differences in the greenness (as measured by SPAD metre) of leaves from plants that received the 50% and 100% strength nutrient solutions. However, leaves from plants that received the 10% and 25% strength solution showed significantly less greenness than that of the plants that received 50% and 100% strength nutrient solutions. There were interveinal chlorosis symptoms on the younger leaves of some plants in the 10% and 25% strength nutrient treatments. It is suspected that this interveinal chlorosis was due to iron deficiency caused by the increased substrate pH. It is concluded that the nutrient solution concentrations typically used for potted gerbera production in commercial greenhouses at the final stage (4-5 weeks) under recirculating subirrigation conditions, can be safely reduced by at least 50% without adversely affecting crop production. Nutrient salts accumulated in the top section of the growth substrate under all treatments levels; however, no phytotoxic effects were observed. No differences in water use (141 ml per plant per day) were observed amid the various nutrient levels. Fertilizer inputs were reduced in the 50%, 25%, and 10% treatments by 54%, 75%, and 90% respectively, relative to the 100% treatment. After 4 weeks under recirculating conditions, the qualities of the nutrient solutions were still within acceptable limits. 