The issue of English grammar is a complex area of linguistic study which consists of a wide variety of different theories and rules. Tense and syntax are two such areas of study and the aim of this assignment is to look at whether tense is in fact a matter of syntax. Tense is described as 'a particular set of inflectional affixes that communicate information about the time frame in which something exists or occurs'. (Berk, 1999:98). It is concerned with locating events and situations at particular points along a time line and therefore the grammatical markings which are found on verbs are present in order to indicate 'time reference relative to either the time of speaking or the time at which some other situation was in force'. (Jacobs, 1995) In the English language there are only two marked tenses, the past and the present and these are distinguished by the inflections which are added to the verbs; past is generally marked with an '-ed' ending and the present marked with an '-s' suffix in the case of third person singular forms. Some languages also have a future tense marker as well but in the English language system, there is no actual suffix that you are able to add to verbs to make it into the future tense. Consequently, it makes it imperative that extra words have to be involved with the construction in order to make it into the future tense. An extreme example of a language with an individual tense system is that of Inuit, which has more than one past tense, each of which marks a different degree of remoteness. (Berk, 1999). Syntax is involved with looking at how words are combined to form clauses, which in turn are then are then combined into larger structures, such as sentences. Syntax, together with morphology (which deals with the form of words) are the two sub-categories which make up grammar. External syntax is associated with the external syntactic properties of all of the different areas which make up speech, including their function and distribution within specific phrases. Nouns are one such part of speech, which are generally found at the head of the noun phrase, whereby they are able to serve as the subject, object, predicative complement or the adjunct, examples of which are shown below:  FORMULA  (Subject)  FORMULA  (Object)  FORMULA  (Predicative complement)  FORMULA  (Adjunct) In the case of verbs, a large majority of these are characteristically found at the head of verb phrases. Auxiliaries, such as will, have and must are commonly labelled as a closed sub-class of verbs which function as dependent within verb phrases, for example, 'will sing' and 'must have gone'. (Collins & Hollo, 2000) The first verb in the verb phrase is always the one which carries the tense as no other verb has the ability to do so. As is often the case, however, non-native speakers of the language fail to notice this grammatical rule and are commonly found to produce such constructions as 'she didn't wanted any food', which is seen as grammatically incorrect as both 'did' and 'wanted' carry past tense markers. Therefore, although this sentence is comprehensible as it is simple enough to be able to extract the meaning being put across, it is not grammatically correct. Consequently, it can be seen that the types of words and their position within a sentence are extremely influential and can often cause confusion and error if these are incorrectly use in the construction. It seems appropriate at this stage, therefore, to say that from this point of view, tense is in fact a matter of syntax as the combination of words to form the sentences is imperative if the construction is to be grammatically and linguistically understood. It has been noted over many years that the time frames associated with tense markers have broadened and there are occasions where the expressions past and present have misled many people. This is because there are instances, for example, whereby past tense markers can be used in non-past contexts and where present tense markers can manipulate the time frames in many different ways.The use of the present instead of the past tense in interaction has the purpose of creating immediacy rather than time distance. Therefore, when putting across their information, the speaker is likely to use the present tense for all verbs apart from the first, which works to set the scene and therefore indicate that the situation is not actually occurring in the present time. Consequently, the past incident is made to seem far less distant and therefore more real to the addressee of the speech act. In fact in the English grammatical system, present tense is often used in order to express routine activities, for example 'my brother works at the zoo', which he obviously started doing in past, is continuing in the present and is likely to continue doing so in the future. (Berk, 1999) The simple present tense is also often used by writers for the purpose of increasing tension and suspense when relating to past events which are in the narrative present, for example in the case of 'Jack climbs the beanstalk and creeps into the giant's castle'. There is also the manipulation of time frames when a speaker wishes to refer to something scheduled to occur at some point in the future, by combining the simple present tense with a word or phrase which expresses time, for example 'the game starts after the meal'. Similarly, there is the fact that past tense does not always exclusively refer to past time, as can be seen in the following example, 'If he came into the studio tomorrow', whereby 'came' indicates the past tense but in the same construction you also have 'tomorrow', which refers to something in the future. Past tense can also be used to describe something which is happening in the present in order to make the situation appear more remote and ultimately less extreme, as is shown from the following examples;  FORMULA   FORMULA  As is shown in example 2, by using the past tense even though the situation is occurring in the present, it comes across as being far less confrontational and there is the creation of greater social distance. (Jacobs, 1995) When reporting the thoughts or feelings of an individual within the use of finite embedded clauses, the tense of verbs in these embedded clauses is very often moved from present to past. Therefore, an utterance such as, 'I don't ever want to see you do that again', she said, is often rephrased as 'she told him that she didn't ever want to see him do that again' in order to make it sound slightly more indirect and therefore less aggressive and forceful. Consequently, the syntactic structure of the sentence has been altered by changing the present to the past tense for the purpose of altering how the context of the utterance comes across. There are several different views which are expressed about tense in the language system. The traditionalist view of tense derives from a Latin model of grammar, whereby there are three tenses; past, present and future in English. However, the problem with this view is that Romance languages and Greek actually have a future tense which has been morphologically encoded where as English does not, for example 'to speak' in Italian for 1 st person singular:  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  Here, it can be seen that for each tense, the word has been slightly altered in order to produce the correct tense. In English, however, the future tense would be 'will speak', therefore showing that an extra word has to be included in the utterance in order to produce the correct tense. Consequently, this traditionalist view of tense is not possible in English but is relevant for a range of other specific languages. There is then the structuralist view of tense, which works from the perspective that tense is form-driven and that there are in fact just two tenses; past and present in English or past and non-past. This view therefore refuses to acknowledge that English has a future tense as a result of the fact that words which refer to future time, such as will or shall are modal auxiliaries and therefore there is no finite verb form. For example, in the case of 'she will tell everyone the story'. Although this construction refers to future time, the inclusion of the word 'will' in order to express the future tense is a whole new word which has to be incorporated and is not just an inflectional ending as is seen with both the past and present tenses. Downing and Locke (2002) look at the fact that in English, the past tense is the marked tense as opposed to the present tense which is unmarked. This is as a result of the fact that in the past tense, the majority of the verbs have a distinctive past form and that semantically, 'the past tense refers to an action that is visualised as remote, either in time or as unreality'. (Downing and Locke, 2002:355) They also continue by refusing the idea that English has a future tense. This is due to the fact that inflections mark tense and as the future tense is not distinguished by inflections on the verb but by extra words included in the construction, they feel that technically English has no future tense. The final main view of tense is the functionalist view, which focuses on the idea that tense is meaning driven and therefore as a result, it is imperative to distinguish between tense and time relations. The semanticist Reichenbach (1947) worked from the point of view that English has a variety of tenses which are 'three inherent time points associated with all manifestations of the verb that are related at deep structure between the moment of speech time (S), the event time (E) and a temporal primitive Reference Time (R)' (, 2006: Lect 5) From this, Reichenbach then worked to produce nine tense forms from a maximum of 24 different groupings of combinations of SRE. After this, Hornstein was then able to reduce these to just six tense structures consisting of the past, present and future in both the simple and perfect form. In conclusion, it can be seen that there are many differing view points on the area of tense in linguistics and this lack of certainty therefore makes it difficult to decide whether or not tense is a matter of syntax. As syntax is primarily involved with the grammatical arrangement of words in sentences, it would seem logical to agree that in fact tense is involved with syntax. For example, in the case of future tense, whereby additional words have to be added to the sentence structure in order to form the correct grammatical construction. Without logical ordering of lexis in a sentence, it is unlikely that the utterance would make complete linguistic sense and therefore the correct tense would not be easily identifiable, culminating in a lack of understanding of the context of the situation. Without tense, there would be no way of identifying when in time different events occur but ultimately it is the syntactical structure which makes the sentence coherent and therefore gives the ability to understand the context of the situation. There is the large issue, however, of whether or not English actually has a true future tense and there are many differing opinions on this. However, it is this area of tense which tends to provide the greatest insight as to whether or not tense is a matter of syntax. This is since, when referring to the future, there are many different syntactic means of making references to events or situations which are likely to occur. For example, 'w ill + infinitive' can be used in the case of an utterance such as, 'she will be going to the party'. There can also be the use of 'be due to + infinitive' as well as 'be about to + infinitive' and just simply the future perfect as in the case of the utterance 'she will have finished before we get there'. All of these different possible combinations which can be used to refer to the future, therefore indicate that tense must be a matter of syntax as the correct arrangement of these words are essential in forming grammatically and linguistically correct sentences. Without the correct syntactical structure of sentences, it would not be completely clear as to the tense that the utterance is trying to relate to, therefore creating confusion and lack of comprehension resulting in the misunderstanding of the context and circumstances which are attempting to be described. It is harder to identify from both the past and present tense however, whether or not tense is a matter of syntax in English. This is as a result of the fact that in the majority of cases, these two tenses are characterised solely by inflectional endings and therefore although they have to fit logically into the sentence, there is only one word compared to several when constructing the future tense. Consequently, the importance of syntax seems far more easily distinguishable when trying to construct an utterance in the future tense compared to the past and present. Overall, however, it has to ultimately be concluded that tense is a matter of syntax, although the complex issue of different tenses in English makes this a rather grey area of linguistic study. 