In the study of economic anthropology, pre-capitalist exchange mechanisms are mainly studied by the substantivists and formalists schools, which often represent several similarities with various analyses and interpretations. These two schools tend to concern two different types of analyses, one is social context of exchange, and the other is distribution and output (Hodder,I.1982:199). Hence, this essay is mainly emphasised on the approaches of social exchange systems by two distinctive schools, introducing the significance of substantivists' approaches with its limitations. Furthermore, the case study of aboriginal societies in New Guinea and northwest America were represented in order to investigate the pre-capitalist society and material transaction, which mainly indicating several types of reciprocity within social contexts. Finally, this essay is going to represent the formalist approaches, which was largely contributed to the archaeological study of pre-capitalist economic system. This section is mainly going to represent the substantivists approaches with the outline of a functional theory of reciprocity and redistribution. Commonly, substantivists tend to identify the primitive economy is embedded in social relations. Therefore pre-capitalist economy is often studied as part of a local or regional cultural system. Furthermore, the use of ethnographic models for the study of pre-capitalist exchange processes is concerned with understanding exchange as social process. Generally, the substantivists approach tends to be identified as functionalists, because assumptions are made relating systemic equilibrium, adaptation for maintain equilibrium, and organic interrelations (Hodder,I.1982:199-200). Unlike capitalist economies, the primitive economies are generally resolved into two types of exchange systems by the approaches of substantivists. Reciprocity and Redistribution, these different types of economic transaction contribute as integrating organizational principles of land and labour allocation, work organization, and the movement of goods in long term relationships (Hodder,I.1982:199-200). Although the social relation of redistribution and reciprocity represent various differences, these types of exchanges likely occur within same social contexts, consequently these tend to be merged (Sahlins,M 1972:194-196). The definition of reciprocity is that those vice versa movements, the action and reaction between two parties. It tends to be considered as the types of social duality and symmetry. Furthermore, kinship distance is especially relevant to the form of reciprocity, because its relationship was more significant in pre-capitalist society than those of modern society. It is the organising principle of most social relations, and usually tend to be continued in family and inter-household relations(Sahlins,M .1972:194-196) Furthermore, Sahlin's definitions of generalised, balanced, and negative reciprocities are highly applicable to the substantivists approaches.( Hodder,I.1982:200) Commonly, generalized reciprocity refers to transactions that are relatively altruistic. The examples of ethnographic formulae are sharing, hospitality, free gift, help, and generosity. Therefore, generalized reciprocity tends to be identified as less sociable. Balanced reciprocity refers to direct exchange, such as moral norm of give and take. It indicates the exchange of the same types of goods to the same amounts due to the obligation. In short there is concept of equivalence. Furthermore, balanced reciprocity tends to be recognised as "less personal" and "more economic" reciprocity, compared with generalized reciprocity. Finally, Negative reciprocity generally refers to the unsociable exchange, which tends to be concerned as get something for nothing without any punishment, therefore identified as the most impersonal type of exchange. For example, the different degrees of cunning, guile, stealth(Sahlins,M.1972:193-195) (Korytoef,I.1986:68-70). Secondly, redistribution represents centralised movements by collection, and division of labour was identified within the members of a group. Redistribution often implies the existence of strong political centre in society, such as kinship based leadership, therefore redistribution tends to be identified as an organisation of reciprocities. Commonly, the contexts of redistribution in primitive communities takes various forms, such as redistributing local products, trade, rank, chieftainship, collective political action, succour of emergency food and refuge, subsidizing religious ceremony and construction of both public and religious buildings, war and hospitality. Typically, the acquisition of means of production in pre-capitalist societies is highly involved with the redistribution of goods through the communities. Therefore pre-capitalist society largely depend on day to day output, it does not rely on a massive complex division of labour as modern economy. In especially the domestic mode of production represents the division of labour, which is determined by sex and age. Moreover, this principle is also applicable to higher-level cooperation, such as the task of procurement. (Sahlins,M 1972:185-191) There are three basic criticisms against the substantivist approaches. First, exchange tends to be seen as a moral act following social obligations, and often individuals are subject to the rules and demands of reciprocity. Therefore society tends to be considered as consist of preformed rules, which the individuals have to act. Hence, construction of social strategies by individuals tends to be unusual within society. Moreover, the conflicts and contradictions between interests are relatively identified as unusual. Second, the substantivists' concepts of "embeddedness" have been controversial, because even the modern economy is embedded within relations of production as well as within political and social strategies. Hence, the problem is derived from the misleading of definition between primitives and modern economies. Third, the relationships between the types of exchange and societies represent lack in empirical support. Due to a cross-cultural analogy, the various correlations of different types of exchange indicate positive relationships. (Hodder,I.1982:200-201) This section is going to represent one of the substantivists approached of pre-capitalist societies, which focused on aboriginal economy of New Guinea, American North coast, and Kula Ring. This case study mainly emphasized that these exchange system represent variety of reciprocity within these social contexts, in especially significance of relationship between alliance, which contains concepts of solidarity and hostility, and the political transaction of primitive valuable. Recent anthropological studies in New Guinea and the northwest coast of America lead to contrast aboriginal economies in stateless societies. Generally, the aboriginal societies have four alliance networks, including small scale, stateless, primitive warfare, primitive valuables, and leadership roles. Commonly, groups and political units tend to be small in aboriginal societies, as hunter, gatherers, fisher, and agriculturalist, which all organized into lineage, lineage clusters, and clans of varying size, and the accessibility to food and natural resources are varying within society. Furthermore, these aboriginal societies widely shared ceremonial exchanges, which required the transaction of valuables and the feeding of guests at feast celebrations, especially in New Guinea. Small clan segments tend to be useful in pre-capitalist societies, which are often identified as politically and economically vulnerable, therefore these groups need allies as ceremonial exchange partners, for the purpose of foodstuffs in the case of disasters, defence in the case of warfare, or external trade for valuables. Commonly, these political alliances for warfare and for ceremonial exchange are sustained through transaction of foods and valuables, as well as arranging a marriage to secure kindred, which tend to be identified as life long reciprocal transactions, therefore these marriage alliance are frequently controlled by corporate descent groups. Big men or lineage leaders in stateless societies occupy internal and external roles, and political leaderships particularly had better accessibilities to food stuffs, women, and valuables through ceremonial exchanges. In some region, leadership careers were open to talent, demonstrating superiority, achievement and luck would help to obtain leadership position. In New Guinea, big men frequently demonstrate effectiveness in entrepreneurial roles, in especially success in warfare and ceremonial exchange. In Kula, successive commonly leads to enhance the social position of leader, and also enhance the power of decent groups and followers. The meaning and usage of primitive valuables in aboriginal economies have internal and external roles, for example Kula shell necklace and bracelets are often identified as valuables. Acquiring the valuables in political or social transactions was commonly required the status. Furthermore, the difficulties of understanding the role of primitive valuables are derived from the various meaning of money, for example, the primitive valuables as reciprocal payment in warfare, as commodity money, or as early coinage. (Dalton,G.1977:191-204) The introduction of processual archaeology by Marshall Sahlin made large impact into the formalist approaches in especially the study of European prehistory, which turned to emphasise quantitative modelling (Bradley,R. Edmonds,M.1993:4-5). This section is going to discuss the development of exchange studies in archaeology with representing the outline of formalist approach, as well as those of limitations. In archaeological term, most widely applied formalist approach is regression analysis, which is known as a model of down the line exchange. The regression analysis of the fall-off curve was mainly applied to identify the particular types of exchange distribution, and explains this occurrence mathematically with the assumptions that the primitive economy is described in modern economical term, such as minimization of advantage, scarcity, and surplus. This mathematical model identified as relatively close to geographers. Moreover, this analysis is applicable cross-culturally in many archaeological cases studies. The regional study of exchange was pioneered by Colin Renfrew's obsidian distribution in the Aegean and Near East. It indicates the principle of fall-off procedure that the distribution of highly localised materials shows certain regularities that materials are abundant near the source(Hodder,I.1982:201-203). This simple method tends to be considered as high validity, and this method has contributed the basic principles for various subsequent studies of obsidian trade on the regional level. (R.Torrence .1986:14) Generally, three mathematical curves have been considered relevant to the distance regressions analysis: Pareto model, Exponential distance decay, and Gaussian fall off. In especially, Gaussian fall off first applied to archaeological case, considering the distributions of Iron Age coin types in Britain and the distance of the find-spot from the mint.(Renfrew,C.1977:73-76) The numbers of early analyses focused on the changing numbers of objects in relation to the distribution from the source. Almost without exception, the numbers decreased with distance from the source, because generally the transport of goods from a source requires the input of energy, therefore the greater the distance requires the greater the input energy. Hence the pattern of absence in directional exchange with distance from the source is confirmed. Furthermore, the concept of effective distance also depends on the degrees of difficulty in travelling. For instance, deserts and mountains would increase effective distance. On the other hand, rivers and sea frequently would decrease it, therefore depending on the available transport system. The development of new travel technologies decrease effective distance, such as long distance maritime travel or camel in desert(Renfrew,C.1977:71-74). The principle of this analysis was formulated in Renfrew's work "Law of Monotonic Decrement". This was an analytical device which was conducted to isolate anomalies, and distinguish between contact and supply zone(Bradley,R. Edmonds,M.1993:5-8). The concept of contact and supply zone is indicated in Renfrew's obsidian exchange works. The slope of the line summarizing the relationship between quantity and distance is nearly flat for sites located within 300km from the source, but it decrease steeply after this point. Renfrew described this flat curve as "supply zone", and the site located outside this region were termed the "contact zone". The supply zone represents the area that residences have ability to travel to the source regularly. On the other hand, contact zone represent the area that residence did not have ability to contact with the source, largely rely on the exchange system. Furthermore, after keeping some amounts of obsidian for own use, people tend to exchange the rest of obsidian with residence who live further from the source. Renfrew termed this pattern "down the line exchange".( R.Torrence. 1986:14) <figure/>This was a pioneering attempt to lead a quantitative link between a specific anthropological model of exchange and its material residue and its material consequences, these were nearly recoverable archaeologically. Moreover, formalist techniques tend to be used as identify "types" of exchange that substantivist anthropologist placed along an evolutionary continuous (Bradley,R. Edmonds,M.1993:5-8). Furthermore, the study by Ian Hodder represents the high developments of the original regression analysis. This study indicates how the regression analysis of different "fall off patterns" could distinguish between the movements of low and high values commodities, which shows whether short or further movements in transport. Hence, it highly represents the prospects of extrapolating from distribution patterns to social organisation through understanding of how the exchange of goods had been organised. However, this analysis should be considered as not all the exchanges of artefacts were remained in archaeological record, such as in the case of recycling of metal and ceramic. Hence, the lithic artefacts tend to be considered as well suitable for this regression study, in especially obsidian. (Bradley,R. Edmonds,M.1993:5-8) The several limitations lie behind the formal analyses. The most serious limitation of the mathematical formalist approach derived from those of assumptions. Firstly, there is the insufficiency of the ability to explain the process that lead to the archaeological distribution, because formalists largely depend on the cross-culture assumptions, therefore the social context is not adequately considered. Although the fall-off curve leads to the prediction of amount of exchange materials, it is inadequate to explain the whole exchange process even the relationship between the distance and amount of material fit in formula(Hodder,I.1982:201-203). Furthermore, in the case of describing the observed data, there are the questionable assumptions between the nature of material culture and the roles that it plays in social life, due to the complexity of the situation(Bradley,R. Edmonds,M.1993:5-8). Moreover, the unreliable assumptions of scarcity, maximization and benefit of past economy lead to the insufficiency of explaining the reason why a particular formal pattern is found, even modern economic theory into primitive economy might be adequate for describing the past economy. In addition, the description of observable in economist terminology is controversial, because there is little attempt made to explore the social contexts and political strategies that lie behind the observation(Hodder,I.1982:201-203). Thus, it could be say approach only offers a basis "for describing and comparing distributions which are already reasonably well documented" it does not provide sufficient grounds for inferring the character of the processes that lay behind those patterns(Bradley,R. Edmonds,M.1993:7-8). Hence, there is certainly a necessity for more of these detailed, further problem oriented regional studies to improve this approach. This conclusion attempts to summarise the application of anthropological approaches to the study of pre-capitalist economies in archaeological term. According to this essay, there are two main anthropological schools of the study of exchange system in pre-capitalist society. Substantivist commonly assumes pre-capitalist economy is embedded in social relation, and tends to be considered that pre-capitalist economy were mainly derived from two types of exchange systems, reciprocity and redistribution. The concepts of these exchange systems were represented by anthropological case studied of aboriginal societies. The study of New Guinea and American Northwest coast indicates that there were several reciprocities within social contexts, which was sustained by exchange of valuables between alliances. Furthermore, formalist approach generally apply "regression analysis", this mathematical models of fall-off curve procedures have been widely applied to the archaeological studies of pre-capitalist economy. More specifically, Renfrew's obsidian distribution study enhanced to link between anthropological model of exchange and its archaeological material residues. Although there are several limitations in both substantivists and formalists approaches, it is certain that these anthropological knowledge was considered to contribute the improvement of archaeological pre-capitalist exchange studies. 