The nature of the transition between Mesolithic and Neolithic periods is a major research concern, in particular how rapidly the change in material culture occurs, the mechanisms of change, as well as whether immigrants brought Neolithic or adopted by indigenous people. "A Neolithic revolution? New evidence of diet in the British Neolithic" written by Michael Phillip Richards and Robert Emest Mortimer Hedges in 1999 are inferred especially the subsistence practice change from maritime to terrestrial based consumption, which is often assumed as shift from wild to domesticated resources at Mesolithic-Neolithic transition. The main argument of this article is to re-assess the work of Tauber, who first explained the complete rapid dietary shift at Mesolithic-Neolithic transition with application of stable isotope measurements. This rapid dietary shift assumes that change from exclusive use of wild foods in the Mesolithic to increased use of domesticated resources in the Neolithic. In order to investigate rapidity of dietary shift, Tauber mainly applied stable isotope analysis and used the valuable results of this new chemical analysis of human bones. Stable isotope analysis of human skeletal remains, which is indicated as direct evidence of human diets, compared with archaeological records. In this paper, Richards and Hedges represented new stable isotope result to confirm the isotope result of Tauber's previous work. Generally, carbon in consumed diets has been resolved in human bones, therefore measurements of the carbon stable isotope ratio can categorise the main diets of individuals whether marine or terrestrial base. In general, carbon stable isotope data in human bone represents -11 or -12‰ for marine based diets, whereas -20 or -21‰ for terrestrial protein diets. However, stable isotope value is a quantitative measurement, therefore the middle values between marine and terrestrial based diet, as -16‰, it represent approximately half terrestrial and half marine based diets. The absence of Mesolithic human remains from British sites, due to the rising sea-levels, Richards and Hedges used Neolithic human remains from a variety of British coastal and inland sites, moreover human remains are mostly dated by Oxford Radiocarbon Accelerator Unit (ORAU), and the radiocarbon date from rest of skeletons are derived from the published values of British Museum radiocarbon laboratory. The represented isotope ratio in this article shows clearly all of the individuals dated after 5400 BP have evidence of terrestrial based consumption. This result highly explains a rapid abandonment of marine consumption in the Early and Middle Neolithic. Although this article could not identify the introduction of Neolithic material culture into Britain whether by immigrants or adopted by indigenous people, this article clearly suggests there was a rapid dietary shift from marine resources to terrestrial base consumption at Mesolithic-Neolithic transition in Britain. According to Milneral. (2004:9-22), Tauber's previous work has several limitations, including choice of sample from archaeological contexts, the sample size bias, and results are confined to Denmark, and chronologically dispersed. Despite these previous drawbacks, Richards and Hedges applied appropriate methodology to re-assess Tauber's work with sampling human remains from various sites within Britain, both interior and coastal Neolithic sites. Furthermore, Richards and Hedges mainly applied Oxford Radiocarbon Accelerator Unit for dating human skeletons, as well as published data from the British Museum radiocarbon laboratory, whereas Tauber's samples were possibly caused approximately 400 radiocarbon years gap due to the absence of applying "marine reservoir effect" (Richards, Price and Koch 2003:288-293). The results of Richards and Hedges article indicate the complete dietary shift in Neolithic Britain, because the results of 78 radiocarbon-dated human remains suggest the marine base diets. Moreover, the structure of article is well planned, and also main arguments and isotope results are highlighted clearly. However, it might be preferred that the application of scattergram with valuable isotope results. Furthermore, this article is quoted by the numbers of authors, therefore it is clear this article have been considered as making large contribution to the study of subsistence change at Mesolithic-Neolithic transition. However limitations for isotope measurements are introduced only a small number, there are, in particular, "preliminary models" which show that a diet dominated by terrestrial food might include up to 20 per cent of marine protein without raising the stable isotope values (Barbereba and Borrero 2004:191-195). Moreover, this article has not been supported by the cultural continuity, which tends to be observed from faunal assemblages. In general, faunal assemblage refers to the generalised dietary tendency over long period, whereas stable isotope data refers to the dominant protein intake by an individual during the last 10 years before death (Barbereba and Borrero 2004:191-195). Thus, the term "stable isotope analysis as a direct evidence of human diet" which is used in this article, is considered as not suitable expression, because the dietary reconstruction needs to consider with combination of other evidences (Milneral. 2004:9-22). Furthermore, this result did not clearly represent subsistence change from hunter-gatherer to agriculturalists at Mesolithic-Neolithic transition, because generally stable isotope analysis cannot distinguish between wild and domesticated resources (Thomas 2003:67-73). This conclusion attempts to summarise the brief critique of "A Neolithic revolution? New evidence of diet in the British Neolithic." written by Richards and Hedges in 1999. According to this critique, a limited representation of isotope analysis drawback could be identified as weakness of this valuable article, especially for people who are studying stable isotope analysis. On the other hand, the important results are represented well, and this isotope results are frequently referred by other isotope studies. Thus it can say the usefulness and values of this article is relatively high. Therefore this article would be playing important role in the study of investigating nature of the transition between Mesolithic and Neolithic. RICHARDS, M.P., and HEDGES, R.E. 1999. A Neolithic revolution? New evidence of diet in the British Neolithic, Antiquity 73: 891-897. 