<heading>Food diary</heading><table/><heading>Food descriptive</heading><list>Rice: boiled rice, in especially only used Japanese rice. (Not basmati, long grain rice)Miso soup: miso is a Japanese soy bean paste, soup is normally cooked with some vegetables (onion, carrot, cabbage)Thai curry: cooked from green curry pasteNikujaga: boiled beef mince with vegetables (onion, potato, carrot and green peas) , flavoured with soy source, alcohol, sugar and fish stockCurry and rice (Japanese style): vegetable curry with meat, but cooked from Japanese curry pasteOmurice: the combination of food western and Japanese, rice is enclosed in omeletteNatto: a fermented food made of soybeans</list>This food diary is mainly going to introduce my food consumption in order to evaluate the multiple meanings of foods in everyday life and its significance for own cultural identity, as well as for better understandings of studying past food ways. According to Bentley (2001: 179-195), food as the base of civilisation, contains deep, multi-layered meanings. The level of family, community, ethnicity, class, religion, or other entirely is all represented in an individual sense of identity, which is examined by the study of dietary. In the purpose of this food diary, one week within this term is selected to record my food consumptions and social contexts for producing reflective analysis of how cultural, social, political or economic factors impact on my food selection, preparation, consumption and discard of food. In order to evaluate my food diary, I should firstly introduce my background and origin. I spend entire life in my home country Japan until University starts, and now I have been studying in British University for four years. Therefore my dietary consumption mainly consists of Japanese food, in order to introduce these meals I tried to translate the name of meal in English and put the Japanese name in the next. The eating habits have been considered as highly different from the past and present. Compared the differences of past and present food consumption style, past consuming habits mainly followed the Japanese traditional style ichiju-sansai (food style in rice, soup, pickles with three other side dishes.) However the food consumption during University life tends to be simple style, for example eating one large dish as curry or omurice, or cooking simple foods with following Japanese traditional style without other side dishes, due to the reduction of cooking time. It is surely time consuming to prepare various dishes. Generally I spend less than one hour for food preparation, or sometimes cook large amounts of foods for consuming whole day. Moreover, I tend to avoid discarding food in the case of excess cooking, for example save extra foods by freezing. As represented in my food diary, my main dietary consumption is based on Japanese food. One of the largest shifts of my food consumption is the breakfast. Almost every breakfast is Japanese traditional style food for morning, as rice with miso soup. The breakfast, which consumed in Japan, is rice, miso soup, pickles, and three other dishes, such as eggs, grilled fish, seaweeds or  tofu (bean curd). As MacClancy (1992: 17-23) suggests that the consumption of original foods in other country is a steady source of comfort and represent the home life people denied, for example missionaries in Hawaii reject the local diet, but wait for slow ships from their home country. This example is relatively similar to my food consumption, because the ingredients of my food is mainly brought or send it from Japan. MacClancy (1992: 17-23) interprets this as the beginning to assume personalities in own right by attaching to certain foods, moreover a strong attachment to particular foods is a peculiarly human habit. <heading>Sushi and raw fish consumption</heading>MacClancy (1992:145-158) claimed cooking foods, in especially the transformation of meat from raw to cooked, are a mark of civilisation, although there is a customs to eat raw fish in Japan, it is known as sushi. According to the food diary in 19 November, sushi is a one of Japanese specialties based on boiled rice flavoured with sweetened rice vinegar. Although there is a wide variety of sushi, we chose temaki-zushi which is wrapping rice with thin seaweed sheets enclosed various chopped vegetables and raw fish. However it is difficult to access fish for raw consumption in Britain, due to rare consumption of fish in raw. There are shops selling fish for raw consumptions, however it is located in London and fish cost incredibly high. Therefore the 19 November sushi party was mainly used vegetables and smoked-salmons which are easily access. Furthermore, there was a decision for eating sushi whether at Japanese restaurant or cooking at kitchen. However, we decided having dinner at our kitchen, because consuming Japanese food at restaurant found the differences in taste from our foods. This is well illustrated by MacClancy (1992: 204-208), who indicates that the ethnic foods may have to alter recipes to meet local demands, changing traditional taste in order to be accepted by the new hosted nationals, therefore I chose to prepare sushi by ourselves. Furthermore, the time and occasion for my social life tend to be small, in order to saving time for study. Except 19 November Sunday night, I consumed food by my self. Normally I bring meals to own room and consuming front of the studying desks. <heading>Alcohol consumption</heading>Martin (2001:119-141) suggests that drinking was a social and a sociable activity in late medieval and early modern Europe, although my little social life can be apply to my occasion for alcohol consumption, which is relatively few in time. I did not consume alcohol except Sunday night from this food diary. Moreover, it tends to take place rather my room or kitchen than drinking out in the case of having alcohol. The usefulness of drinking alcohol in room or kitchen is that easier access than going out, availability to drink until morning, and the cost for alcohol would be low compared with pub or night club. <heading>Rice consumption </heading>Furthermore, as indicated in food diary, the frequency of rice consumption is relatively high. The Japanese rice consumption is well presented in the research of food-nation identifications by Ohnuki-Tierney (1993:41-2), stated rice as the staple of Japanese diet and speciality in national identity formation, due to the fact that most Japanese consume rice for the evening meal at home (Ohnuki-Tierney 1993:41-2). However, recently Japanese rice consumption has been reduced due to the increase of ethnic food (Ohnuki-Tierney 1993:41-2). It is well presented by work of Bell and Valentine (2001: 169-183), which claimed the history of any nation's diet is the history of the nation itself", with episodes of colonialism and migration, trade and exploitation, and cultural exchange. The adoption and altered recipe of ethnic food in Japan are reflected in my food diary, such as consumption of omurice, curry, pasta, and chow mein. Japan was isolated from foreign contact and commerce by government's policy, for 250 years prior to 1868 (Insullal. 1968: 753-777), therefore introduction of ethnic food were relatively new to Japanese. The increase popularity of ethnic foods is considered as highly raised by the increase in tourisms and travel overseas (MacClancy 1992: 204-208), which possibly represent the growth of the Japanese economy since end of the Second World War (Insullal. 1968: 753-777). Moreover the pace of dietary change is explained by the work of Popkin, which has accelerated to varying degrees in different regions of the world (Popkin 1993: 138-157). <heading>Religion </heading>As Harris (1986: 47) indicates that the dietary tends to be related to religious factors. My religion is Buddhism, which is one of the major religions in Japan. Buddhism often confuse people with veganism, although only a small number of extremely devout Buddhist priests voluntarily deprive themselves of all animal food. Thus, Buddhists can eat animal flesh as long as they are not responsible for the termination of the animal's life (Harris 1986: 23-24). Moreover, Farb and Armelagos (1980: 35) suggest that many eat butter and drink milk, and in some countries that are largely Buddhist, therefore it is not only Japanese consume meat among Buddhism countries. According to the food diary, my meat consumption is clear, such as kebab, sausages, curry as well as sushi. <heading>Take-away and Shopping </heading>Foods shopping, living alone and living outside Japan are all my first experience, therefore buying take-away food for eating at home can be say one of my food habits since University starts, because there was no necessity to buy food by myself in Japan. The frequently use shopping place tends to be town centre, especially Sainsbury, which is one of British largest supermarket chain, having wide variety of goods available to consumer. Beardsworth and Keil (1997: 32-46) suggest that the supermarket itself may be considered one of the most successful outcomes of the development of modern systems of food production and distribution, indicating the extent of control over quality and the reliability of supplies, compared to those of the past. The development of the modern food system in the West is considered due to the long distance transformation of food production, which has been improved by the emerging international agricultural specialisation, between a numbers of nations with close economic ties to Britain. Such trade has shaped international relations (Beardsworth and Keil 1997: 32-46). However, the reason why I rarely use other large shops in Reading is that the accessibility tends to be difficult compared to Sainsbury, which is located in centre of town. Furthermore, the seasonal foods are tend to be low price, quality and quantity are relatively high, therefore my food consumption in Britain is identified rather "seasonal eater" than using long shelf life foods, such as ready to eat tin or frozen foods, for example, the spaghetti, pasta source in tin, or pizza, pasty in frozen. However, the process of preservation, including canning and freezing of foodstuffs were the most significant step in the development of an industrial cuisine. Moreover, the use of machines in the production of industrial food is also identified as important development in food preservation (Goody 1997: 338-357). <heading>Pathology</heading>Moreover, there are two reasons why I rarely use long shelf and ready to eat foods, one reason is due to consider the future pathology, which might relate to individual food consumptions. Fairweather-Trait (2003: 1709-1727) suggests that the most prevalent diet-related disorders in industrialised countries are cardiovascular disease, cancers, obesity, diabetes, osteoporosis, because diets in industrialised countries are relatively rich in amino products, fats and sugar, and there are high rates of colorectal, breast, prostate, endometrial and lung cancer. <heading>Dieting</heading>Second reason for the rare consumption of long shelf and ready to eat foods is related to dieting, I tend to reduce food intake and to cook low calories meal in order to reduce weight. Beardsworth and Keil (1997: 173-190) suggest that the emphasis on slimness is a recent characteristic and occurs only in modern western societies. In general, people tend to spend large sums of money, time and effort in order to improve their appearance. Thus, slimness is part of the demonstration success to others, with fat becoming associated with lack of control. However, the current patterns of dieting have the possibilities to lead eating disorder of anorexia nervosa and obesity, which are problems in recent Western societies. Moreover, Beardsworth and Keil (1997: 173-190) also claimed the mostly women involved in dieting and suffering from eating disorders, because the external ideal tends to be set by men, and women frequently evaluated appearance as an indicator of value in marriage market. Traditionally, the great majority of women would have been financially as well as emotionally depending on men. According to this food diary and its interpretation, my food consumption is clearly shifts since University starts, from traditional Japanese style of food to simpler food intake, having take-away food as well as eating alone. This shift would be back when I graduate University and return to my home country. Moreover, this assessment tried to introduce the Japanese food culture, which is recently interrelated with other ethnic foods. This phenomenon is considered as highly reflected to my mixed culture food consumption, as represented in food diary. The introduction and adoption of ethnic food tend to be explained as development of economy and political improvement between other foreign countries, at least in Japan. In the future, if cultural interrelationship is more improved between Britain and Japan, as adoption of various ethnic foods in Japan, would be more easy access to many kinds of Japanese foods in Britain. 