Neanderthals are known as lived between 250k and 40kya in Europe and South West Asia, and 500 individuals in total have been identified, and 12 semi-complete skeletons have been largely contributing the study of Neanderthal anatomy to investigate their environment, behaviour and lifestyles. The physical features of Neanderthals are relatively robust in appearance, short heavily muscled body with relatively short distal limbs, distinctive cranial features in brain size, prominent brow ridge, projecting nose and nasal cavities. According to traditional view, these Neanderthal features might be the result of a genetic isolation under heavy selective stress. However, recently it is suggested that the possible reflection of severe lifestyle and cold adaptation during the last ice age. Thus this essay focused on the Question of how much Neanderthal anatomy represents adaptations to the cold environments, with representing the significance of Neanderthal living environment, the climate reconstruction by oxygen isotope ratio analysis in deep sea sediments, and possible anatomical adaptation with several theories and researches. The Middle Palaeolithic period is known for its dramatic climatic change, which is the later stages of Middle and early late Pleistocene. Pleistocene has at least ten of condition shifts between glacial and interglacial. The definition of glacial periods is a cold climatic episode with widespread ice sheets and reduced sea levels. On the other hand, interglacials are warm climatic episodes, with little or no glacial climatic process and high sea levels. The study of oxygen isotope ratios in deep sea sediment is key for investigating past climate, because deep sea sediments represent accumulation of oxygen isotopes. The skeletons of microscopic organisms, foraminifera, are mainly applied. These foraminifera absorb two stable oxygen isotopes from sea water. Measuring the ration of 18O and 16O in foraminifera reveals relative balance of global sea water and ice sheets. High 18O means growing ice sheets, and reducing global sea levels in glacial period. On the other hand high 16O represent warm climate with rising sea levels and reducing ice sheets. <list><heading>Early Weichselian OIS3-5d 40-118k</heading>Full glacial OIS4 (58-71k)Early glacial OIS5a-5d (71-118k)Last interglacial OIS5e (118-128k) EemianSaalian cool period OIS6 (128-186k)Penultimate interglacial OIS7 (186-242k)Saalian cool period OIS8 242-301OIS6 and 8 is Saalian cool period, landscapes are covered by steppe in southern and Mediterranean Europe, and tundra & steppe mosaic in Scandinavian.Early glacial OIS 5a-5d (71-118k)5b and 5d is glacial sub stages, very short in duration.5a and 5c is temperate interstadialFull glacial OIS4 (58-71k) lack of vegetation led to soil erosion, in arid open environment.Penultimate interglacial OIS7 (186-242k)7b a short ice age7a and 7c full interglacial supported by environmental evidenceLast interglacial OIS5e (118-128) hipo in LondonIce core data divide stage 5e into 5 further stages. Eemian has high frequency oscillations in ice volume</list><heading>The means for hominids</heading>Interglacial climate fluctuated with rapid internal temperature shift, changes happen within individual's life time. Hominine adaptation to millennia of constant climate/ sea level/ plant cover is an increasingly unlikely scenario. More dominant condition is early glacial, open landscape and steppe environments. But Ice core data is indicating the rapidity of change/ oscillation. Therefore millennia of stability model is out. This section is going to discuss Neanderthal anatomical adaptation, mainly the function of projecting nose, large nasal cavities and the large brain size of Neanderthals. The size of Neanderthal nose is remarkably prominent and nasal cavity was large. However, comparing the length and breadth of Neanderthal noses with those of modern humans, the combination is unusual, because the modern cold adapted people, as Inuit, commonly have long and narrow. Thus, this is considered as other types of cold adaptation. Large nasal cavities of Neanderthals likely suggest that the adaptation to the cold climate by providing more surfaces for both warming and moistening the cold arid air before reaching the lungs, as well as for preventing the damage to the brain. Furthermore, the other hypothesis of the Neanderthal nose function was in order to lose heat from energetic activities as hunting. This theory is largely controversial, because it is difficult to assume Neanderthals as more active to heat stress than earlier and modern tropical human who did not have large nose cavities. Moreover, freezing after overheating and sweating would have been harmful in cold climatic conditions. The distinctive brain size is also considered as the cold adaptations in Neanderthal body. Neanderthal skull was long, low and flat. The average brain capacity of Neanderthals is 1600-1700cc for male in volume, 1300 for female in volume. It is large compared Homo erectus, which had brain capacity 1000cc in average. Hence the large brain sizes tend to be interpreted as the tendency through the human evolution. However, the average size of Neanderthal brain is larger than anatomically modern humans, therefore it is interpreted as that the large brain capacity is due to the correlation of large body mass and environmental temperature. For example, people who living in high latitude have both large brain sizes and body masses The typical features of Neanderthal body structure are their strongly built bodies with relatively short distal limbs, compared with anatomically modern humans. Although physical differences might be affected by the varying nutrition, the climatic evidence is possibly related to the distinct body shape and size. The heights of Neanderthal from Near East and anatomically modern human are relatively taller than European Neanderthals. Neanderthal from Near East represent clearly warm adapted physical features. However the methods which have been applied for estimating Neanderthals heights are derived from the methods for modern humans, therefore the reliability is difficult to assess. The massiveness of Neanderthals is suggested by the enlargements of the muscle attachments areas on Neanderthal bones. Moreover, the skeletons of Neanderthal children also indicate that muscularity as inherited features. The muscularity of Neanderthals are commonly interpreted as reflecting a demanding physical lifestyle in cold environment for hunting abilities, although the enlargement of muscle has the risk of reaching the limit to energy reserves. This suggests that massiveness for Neanderthals was necessary for their survival. The physical features of Neanderthals body shape and muscularity are suggested by two main theories by Bergmann and Allen. Bergmann's rule supposed that body weight would tend to be larger. Moreover, Allen's rule suggests that body extremities will be relatively shorter. Both theories suggest it is for conserve heat in cold environments by minimizing body surface for its volume and weight. According to these rules, Neanderthals are considered as cold adapted and early anatomically modern humans were heat adapted. Moreover, the proportions of the leg and arm bones were applied as the limb thermometer, which can indicate the average temperature of the place of origin. The Neanderthal result indicate the average estimated temperature is about 0 degree for Neanderthal habitats. This estimation overlaps the estimated Ice age temperature in Europe. However, as discussed above, the study of deep sea cores suggests the ice age climates was not always cold as previously thought. Moreover, the Neanderthals lived for a long time in a vast area, therefore no typical environments fro Neanderthals. Hence there are difficult to consider only cold adaptation leads to the Neanderthal distinctive anatomical features, it is more possible that they result from interaction with complex factors, such as cold adaptations, the mating patterns, sampling errors, mutations, evolutionary specialisations, and other factors as yet determined. This conclusion attempts to summarise the possible Neanderthal anatomical climate adaptation in cold environments, comparing with anatomically modern humans and modern cold adapted people. According to this essay, the Neanderthal prominent nose and large basal cavities are the combination of the low temperatures and humidity in order to avoid the chance of damaging the lung and brain. Moreover large body core and the shortness of the limbs were result from cold adaptation for conserving heat, which is supported by the Bergman's and Allen's rule. However the study of oxygen isotopic rates suggests that ice age climate was not always severe as previous thoughts, and the widespread Neanderthal occupation represents there are no typical Neanderthal environment. Hence this essay conclude that Neanderthal skeletal features are not only derived from cold adaptation, it is better to consider as the collaboration of various factors led to unique Neanderthal anatomical configuration. 