Blaise Pascal died in 1662, leaving his most famous work, 'Pensées' unfinished. It was a large collection of notes and drafts to be originally titled 'Apology for the Christian Religion'. Published eight years after Pascal's death, 'Pensées' was written to convert the religious opinions of agnostic intellectuals, and offers a new way of thinking with regards to the Christian religion. The section concerning his wager is small in relation to the rest of the drafts, and is organised as a dialogue between Pascal and an interlocutor, Pascal's disbelieving friend. The Wager is a bet that one must take, in order to decide if you should believe in God, and uses pragmatic reasons to convince those taking the bet that to believe in God would be more beneficial. Before Pascal arrived at the Wager theory, he firstly considered a priori arguments for the existence of God - the 'proof' that results from a concept, with no need for evidence from real life experiences. Pascal came to the conclusion that a priori arguments were too far from human reasoning to make any sort of real impact, and act only to prove that God exists, ignoring all other aspects of Christianity. Such a theory (deism) is as abhorrent to the religion as atheism. A large proportion of 'Pensées' was dedicated to the evidence shown in the bible - The Articles of Faith, and Pascal believed that both the fulfilment of prophesises and the occurrence of miracles performed by Christ were good ways of convincing agnostics of the creeds of Christianity. He pointed out, however, that a posteriori evidence (evidence following experience or through using the Bible) was just not strong enough to make somebody want to follow the religion. Pascal then suggested the Wager. It regards the pragmatic reasons for believing, and that to believe in God would be greatly beneficial, such as lifetime happiness and the promise of salvation. The Wager must be taken, one has no choice - a decision must be made. You can either decide that God exists, or than he does not. It is the possible outcome of this choice that should persuade those taking the bet as to which option they should choose. If you decide that you believe God exists, the consequence of accepting the bet and committing oneself to a Christian lifestyle will be an eternal life of happiness. If he does not exist, then you will have lost nothing, as you will have already enjoyed a happy, pure life. If you decide that God does not exist, you will be passing up on the chance of an infinitely happy life, to gain only the finite rewards of an un-Christian lifestyle. Such a choice would be highly irrational - according to Descartes one cannot chose a finite gain over a possible infinite gain. He stated, 'if you win, you win everything, and if you lose you lose nothing'. When considering if the Wager is a good argument for believing that God exists, one must consider both the positive and negative aspects, and then decide if in reality, the intellectual agnostics for whom it was intended would actually use this theory to change their religious outlook. If one used this argument to prove that God exists, the substantial gain they would receive are the benefits of a Christian lifestyle, for example being a member of a Church, a wider community, and feeling that there is a supreme and all knowledgeable being that loves you. These are all highly desirable. If following Christian morals and values, and committing oneself to a pious life, the believer would also be free on sinning and vice, and have a pure mind. Added to the substantial gain, one would also be living with the expectation of an eternal life in heaven with God after this life on Earth. If such an expectation was then fulfilled, then surely salvation is the ultimate reward one could receive. The wager is a good way of showing the agnostic what is on offer, but in its nature is highly persuasive, for example dissuading those taking the bet by describing the disbeliever's life as full of 'tainted pleasures' and 'emptiness', and describing the believer as 'honest, humble, grateful, a doer of good works, a good friend, sincere and true'. The Wager is open to many objections which reduce its credibility as a good argument for the existence of God. Pascal describes how those choosing that God exists should act as a true believer, and to attend Mass and Holy Communion and in turn, this will 'tame you'. One highly apparent objection that surfaces here is the concept of deception: the all knowing God would be able to tell that the supposed Christian was practising the religion with the intention and desire to gain infinite rewards. Can one wholeheartedly believe in anything if you only doing so for personal gain? The belief would be marred by the desire to achieve a reward. Pascal argues that by being around other Christians, you will eventually believe without considering the practical aspects. In my opinion this is unrealistic and would only make the argument work indirectly, and even if the believer forgot their original intentions, the all knowing God would still know why they were in Church in the first instance. If the Wager had been used to convince someone to follow Christianity, then their love of God and Christ is conditional, rather than unconditional, pure love. They would be holding their faith on the promise of rewards. In the eyes of the Church such a motive would be considered immoral. However it is God himself who said 'I will promise you salvation if...' Is God promising something on the condition that you behave in a certain way? If this is true, then Pascal is simply providing a wager in the same way that God Himself has done. A second objection to the Wager is that to believe in God for a bet is juvenile and does not reflect the seriousness of the matter. Should the outcome of a bet, or what is in fact a game of win or lose decide on what you believe, and in turn shape the way you live your life? It seems frivolous to make a decision about immortality, perhaps the most important decision there is to make, using a wager. In the same way that God might not approve of a Christian believing in Him for personal gain, he would surely not approve of using a bet to believe in His existence. A clear problem that is associated with the Wager is the idea that Pascal's decision theory cannot be used for his religion alone (Catholicism). In fact, it does nothing to prove anything about Catholicism in particular, or even the generic Judeo-Christianity. All that the wager aims to do is make the betting agnostic favour theism over atheism. So can the Wager be applied to any religions' gods, or worse can you create a God, and ask someone to believe in it with the promise of personal gain? This is the strongest objection to Pascal's Wager - it does nothing to prove the existence of the Christian God, and thus it could be applied to, for example, Buddha, or the Sikh god Ek Onkar e.t.c. Such a flaw would highly reduce the likelihood of an agnostic using it to believe that the Christian God exists. The Wager already presumes an understanding of what God is, 'since having neither parts nor limits he bears no relation to us', and the whole theory presupposes that He is infinite and omnipotent. The outcome of the Wager is that He will grant the believer eternal life, but how does any living being know that God can do this? How do we know his powers? Pascal himself said that the Bible alone is not strong enough to prove His existence, and in my opinion, it cannot also be considered strong enough to prove the power that God has. The Wager does not provide evidence for the existence of God, and is based upon the assumption that he already exists. This is also shown in a priori theories such as Anselm's Ontological Argument, where Anselm bases his argument on the first premise that God is 'that than which nothing greater can be thought'. How can Pascal's Wager, which itself is based on the idea of God's existence and power, be used to prove that He exists? In conclusion, I do not believe that Pascal's Wager is a good argument for proving that God exists. The Wager simply aims to prove that it would be beneficial for the agnostic to live a Christian lifestyle, and so reap the rewards - the substantial or finite rewards of living a moral, religious life and the infinite reward of salvation. It does not aim to convert atheists, merely curious agnostics, and I believe that this shows the argument's lack of strength. I doubt the Wager would convince anyone of God's existence, and when published in 1670 it was very highly criticised as its shows no form of intellectual reasoning. It is based upon the notion that to believe is advantageous, but what if those taking the bet would prefer to choose that God does not exist? It is not as irrational as Pascal states to choose a concrete, definite gain over what is a possible gain; in fact it seems more rational to choose something that is certain over something that is not. The Wager is a good way of convincing those who are searching for personal gain, but perhaps not for those who are searching the truth about God. 