There are several techniques that can be used to find the root of a simple function. Our function happens to be:  FORMULA  The three techniques that are the most effective to solve this function are bracketing, Newton-raphson and general iteration. Finding the roots of functions mostly involves the process of iteration. Iteration is the repeated application of some computation to converge to a single result. <heading>General iteration </heading>This method is the least accurate of the three. It does not really involve any other procedure apart from guessing where the root is. For example, for our situation we have started at x=0 and stepped x in increments of twice the error until the function value goes positive. I chose the interval of twice the error to always keep the root in a suitable error range when it was found. This of course makes it less accurate but easier to execute. There is no real need for a graph because it takes so many iterations or 'guesses' until the root is found that it would be unreasonable to draw any conclusions from graphical evidence. The solution of the root is 0.5671429999986621 after 283572 iterations. The only thing we can really say about general iteration is exactly what it says itself, that it is a repeated application of a simple procedure until a rather trivial condition is satisfied and is inaccurate just because it takes so long to arrive at a solution. <heading>Bracketing</heading>This process is very simple. It involves taking two extreme values either side of the proposed root value and looking between them to find the exact root. This gives us an interval in which the function has a root. We can repeat this process by halving the interval size and by iteration we are effectively 'homing in' on the location of the root. After each iteration step we know the root is located in an interval half the size of the interval before the iteration step. So if we started with an interval [x 0, x 1] we know the root with an accuracy of x 1-x 0. After n iterations we know the root with an accuracy of x 1-x 0/2 n . Below is a graph of the number of iterations (x axis) against the number of significant figures of the actual solution (y axis). <figure/>This graph clearly shows a linear relationship between these two variables. The solution of the root is 0.5671432907693008 after 30 iterations. Because the root is always in the new interval after each iteration step and the interval halves in size as well, the method is sure to converge to the right result. The number of significant digits for the root increases linearly with each iteration step, therefore it is said to be linearly convergent. However, if we can also calculate the derivative of the function we can improve enormously on the bracketing technique with the so-called Newton-Raphson method. <heading>Newton-Raphson </heading>This method works by choosing a point not far from where we expect the root to be to start the iteration. At each iteration step a new estimate for the root is found as the position where the line tangent at the function cuts through zero. If we denote our estimate for the root after n iteration steps as x n, then the Newton-Raphson method gives for the estimate x n+1 as the next iteration step:  FORMULA  The Newton-Raphson method is not always convergent. However, the method turns out to be quadratically convergent i.e. the number of significant digits doubles every iteration step. This is why it is the method of choice if we need a very accurate determination of the root of a function. Below is a graph of the number of iterations (x axis) against the number of significant figures of the actual solution (y axis). <figure/>The solution of the root is 0.5671432904097838 after 5 iterations. The graph clearly shows it only takes a few iterations for the number of significant figures to reach a more than acceptable total. The graph below shows the number of iterations (x axis) against the number of significant figures (y axis) for the two most accurate techniques, bracketing and Newton-Raphson. <figure/>Newton-Raphson is by far the best estimate of the root because of its solid mathematical method. This method only becomes less reliable when the function is not monotonic I.e. a diverging and converging function. If the Newton-Raphson method were used to start off with for a function that was essentially diverging then the estimate would be well off. The best estimate would be to use general iteration, then bracketing then Newton. I chose one of the axis to represent the significant figures of the actual solution because this gives a better indication of how fast each method converges to a solution of the root. <table/>This table clearly shows that the Newton-Raphson method is by far the most accurate. This method only takes 5 iterations to reach the actual solution. This is represented in the graph by the steep red line which shows how fast the Newton method converges to the root of the function whereas the green line shows a steadier fluctuating climb towards the root over a larger range of iterations. The green line represents the bracketing technique and is still a fairly good way of finding the root of a simple function. The general iteration technique is good for finding the general area of the root but the method is not precise enough for most accurate and efficient scientific calculations. Bracketing can be used as the next step to 'home' in on the root but the Newton method is by far the best when it comes to finding to more complicated functions and to use an analogy, finding a needle in a haystack. 