<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>The first human colonisation of Cyprus has been a much debated topic in recent archaeological discourse particularly since the excavations at Akrotiri Aetokremnos provided dates of human activity several millennia earlier than previous research had shown (Simmons 1991: 863). Further discoveries of Early Pre-Pottery Neolithic sites such as Parekklisha Shillourokambos and Kissonerga Mylouthkia provide evidence for 'colonisation' rather than just 'visitation' which, when studied in the wider context of the island and the surrounding mainland, aid in understanding the process of colonisation not only in Cyprus but also for the Mediterranean islands in general. The following discussion is divided into three sections preceded by a semantic explanation of terms used to describe the stages of colonisation. Part 1 presents the archaeological evidence from Cyprus with reference to key sites, the locations of which are shown in figure 1. The question of the origins of these first settlers is addressed in the second section through the observation of similarities in material culture and technology from sites in the Levant and Anatolia. The third part explores the process of colonisation in the context of Cyprus but also within the general theoretical framework of island colonisation. <heading>VISITATION, OCCUPATION OR COLONISATION? </heading>Before embarking on a discussion about the evidence for the colonisation of Cyprus, it is important to define exactly what is meant by 'colonisation' and to distinguish it from other terms such as 'visitation' or 'occupation'. Although all three terms can be used to describe human presence on the island, each one encompasses different types of human activity and permanence of settlement as reflected in the material remains. Cherry defines occupation to be when "an island has become for one or more groups the principal provider of its subsistence requirements and the focus of its residential pattern throughout the year" (1981:48) in comparison to 'utilisation' which is associated with seasonal or short-term visits for the purpose of exploiting the natural resources, and for accidental or unsuccessful colonisation (1990:198). It is proposed here that there are three stages for discussion in the colonisation of the Mediterranean islands: 'visitation'; 'occupation'; and 'colonisation', not all of which will necessarily be represented on every island. Outlined here are the definitions as used in this study. 'Visitation,' which is based on Cherry's classification of 'utilisation' (ibid.), refers to short and seasonal visits primarily (though not necessarily solely) for the exploitation of island resources. The term 'visitation,' with its connotations of brevity and impermanence, is preferred to 'utilisation' since the exploitation of resources may have been equally important during periods of occupation and colonisation. 'Accidental' and 'unsuccessful' colonisation are excluded from this category since a certain amount of inference is required to surmise whether colonisation was intentional or accidental or whether acquisition of resources was the only objective when visiting an island. It has been cited that the export of domesticates to islands can be taken as evidence of deliberate colonisation (Cherry 1990:198) but this excludes explorations prior to domestication and those groups reliant on a hunter-gatherer subsistence strategy. This theory also precludes alternative methods of the transportation of domesticates such as trade and exchange networks. 'Occupation' as defined by Cherry can be split into two categories, 'occupation' and 'colonisation', both of which suggest a certain level of permanence of settlement and year-round habitation with the island supplying all subsistence resources. Where they differ is in long-term continuity of settlement. 'Colonisation' is the final stage where humans finally inhabit and populate an island without withdrawal due to insufficient resources or unviable population while 'occupation' is the preceding phase in this process, perhaps lasting only a few generations but is then unsuccessful or abandoned resulting in a discontinuity of settlement. <figure/><heading>PART 1: EVIDENCE FOR HUMAN COLONISATION IN CYPRUS</heading><heading>THE FIRST HUMANS: AKROTIRI AETOKREMNOS</heading>Akrotiri Aetokremnos provides the earliest evidence of human activity on Cyprus. It is a rockshelter site on the Akrotiri peninsular in the south of the island with an average radiocarbon date of 10,464±25 b.p. (Simmons 1991:865). The site has been interpreted as a specialised food processing site (Simmons 1999:310) and is characterised by an enormous faunal assemblage containing over 200,000 bones dominated by the remains of extinct Pleistocene species Phanourios minutus, as well as containing a deer, pigs, a variety of birds and marine invertebrates (Simmons 2001:5). Cultural features supporting an anthropogenic origin for this deposit include hearths, burnt bone, chipped stone tools and various other artefacts including 2 picrolite pendants/ beads and a pierced stone disc. <fnote>Hereafter Aetokremnos, in-keeping with convention of Cypriot archaeology. Site names are made up of the name of the nearest village followed by the nearest topographic feature but are usually referred to only by the second word and the village name is dropped. There are some exceptions to this rule, such as Khirokitia- Vounoi, which is known only as Khirokitia. Refering to a site by the second part of the name prevents confusion in cases where villages have more than one site in their environs (e.g. Kalavassos, Kissonerga etc.). </fnote>There is some debate as to whether this site represents colonisation of the island or if it is just a visitation site. Archaeologists have been criticised for their "tendency not only to emphasise the first evidence of human presence in the islands, but also to assume that such finds are indicative of successful colonisation" (Cherry 1990: 198, author's emphasis). The excavator concludes that is it 'unclear' whether the Aetokremnos people were visitors or were actual colonisers (Simmons 2001:14). The people using the site are clearly exploiting the local resources, particularly the endemic fauna, however, since it is estimated that Aetokremnos was in use for several hundred years (Simmons 1999:322), it lacks the brevity associated with 'visitation' and does not appear to be based on seasonal utilisation (Simmons 1999:322). In the absence of any substantial continuity demonstrable between this and later sites, the Akrotiri phase should be defined as an 'occupation' phase rather than colonisation. Given that current evidence indicates that the island was abandoned when native faunal resources declined, it could be argued that this represents visitation. As more discoveries are made which fill in the gap between the Akrotiri phase and the Aceramic Neolithic, it may be that what has thus far been assumed to be visitation or unsuccessful colonisation may require re-evaluation. "The absence of evidence...is not evidence of absence" (Watkins 2004: 24) and perhaps future research may reveal that Aetokremnos does in fact represent the initial stages of colonisation. <heading>COLONISATION:PAREKKLISHA- SHILLOUROKAMBOS AND KISSONERGA- MYLOUTHKIA</heading>Prior to the excavation of Aetokremnos, there was no evidence for human occupation before the Aceramic Neolithic in the 6 th Millennium B.C. Khirokitia and contemporary sites were the earliest known on the island. Comparisons were made between the archaeological remains from contemporary mainland sites and those from Khirokitia in order to establish the origin of the 'first' Cypriots through similarities and to ascertain whether they were direct descendents or if differences in material culture implied that they had island predecessors who were as yet undiscovered. Stanley Price expressed this in the form of two opposing hypotheses: the 'colonisation hypothesis and the 'antecedent development hypothesis', describing the latter as "not only logically but empirically inadequate" (1977b: 66) but which has since been proved correct through discoveries of earlier material. Though it is possible that the Akrotiri people may have been the distant ancestors of later colonisers through the impartation of some kind of 'residual memory' of the island passed down through the generations (Simmons 1999:323), the Aceramic Neolithic phase is so far removed (both chronologically and culturally) that it is difficult to compare the two. Aetokremnos is not a settlement but a processing site, it has no burials, no architecture and is reliant on a hunter-gatherer subsistence strategy, whereas Khirokitia is a large village with stone built structures, intra-mural burials and an economy based on agro-pastoralism. Evidence for the antecedents of the Aceramic Neolithic population was discovered at Parekklisha-Shillourokambos and Kissonerga- Mylouthkia. These are multi-phase sites with the earliest phases having radiocarbon dates in the late 10 th/ 9 th millennium B.P (Peltenburg et al. 2000: 846). These sites, along with Akanthou and Ais- Yorkis belong to a stage in Cypriot prehistory which has been termed the 'Cypro-PPNB' (ibid. ) expressing its contemporaneity with the Levantine PPNB, or Pre-Pottery Neolithic 'B' and also its distinctively individual nature. This period can also be described as the Early Aceramic Neolithic, the advantage of which is that it does not create boundaries and allows for continuity into the next phase, however for ease of reference to specific groups of sites in this discussion 'Cypro-PPNB' will be used. Mylouthkia is characterised by subterranean features such as pits, a semi-subterranean structure and 5 wells which are among the earliest known examples in the world (Peltenburg et al. 2000: 844). The deposits in the wells included: human and faunal remains which were arranged in such a way as to suggest particular burial practices; chipped stone tools such as Byblos points and glossed blades reminiscent of mainland assemblages; domesticated cereal grains and chaff (ibid.:848-849); and a number of groundstone artefacts including a unique polished pink macehead (Peltenburg in Peltenburg et al. 2003: 92). Obsidian, which is not a natural resource available in Cyprus, also appeared in the wells. Croft noted that a "conspicuous concentration of this normally rare material" was retrieved from well 116 and estimated that much more was probably overlooked during excavation (Croft in Peltenburg et al. 2003:5). Shillourokambos is a multi-phase site with occupation lasting over a thousand years, but it is primarily the early phase A and B deposits which are relevant to this discussion. Wells and pits are present here as at Mylouthkia. Post holes indicate the presence of wooden structures, some in the form of round buildings and another which is thought to be an animal enclosure (Guilaine & Briois 2001: 41-42), an explanation which is supported by the presence of domesticates in the faunal assemblage. Fragments of plaster in association with large stones have been interpreted as the remains stone buildings (ibid.:47). The lithic assemblage is comprised of flakes, blades and projectile points, including Byblos and Amuq points comparable to those on the mainland (Peltenburg et al. 2000: 848). The use of sickles is indicated by an antler haft (Guilaine & Briois 2001: 47) and obsidian bladelets are also present (ibid.). Anthropomorphic and zoomorphic imagery are portrayed in sculptural form by a small lime plaster figurine and a carved serpentine head which appears to be feline both of which were discovered in well contexts. These, in addition to a number of incised pebbles, have been taken as evidence for some kind of symbolic or ritualised behaviour (ibid.). The discovery of Cypro-PPNB sites goes some way towards filling the gap between the Akrotiri phase and the Aceramic Neolithic. They also provide evidence for the earliest colonisation (as opposed to visitation) of Cyprus. Given that Shillourokambos and Mylouthkia are reoccupied in later phases and that occupation is contemporary with Kalavasos Tenta which provides settlement continuity into the Aceramic Neolithic, these sites provide evidence of long-term habitation on the island. The investment of time and labour in modification of the landscape as demonstrated by stone architecture at Shillourokambos and the digging of wells, which at Mylouthkia were up to 8 metres deep (Peltenburg et al. 2001: 846), illustrates an attachment to place and implies permanent year-round occupation of the sites, a suggestion which is further supported by burial evidence. While remains of domesticated plant and animal species provide evidence that all the subsistence needs of the population were met by resources available on the island (although initially imported) and did not require them to travel to other sources. Therefore, the evidence from the Cypro-PPNB sites fulfils the necessary requirements for 'colonisation' as outlined in the opening discussion. <heading>PART 2: ORIGINS OF COLONISATION</heading><heading>TRANSMISSION AND TRANSFORMATION</heading>Throughout this discussion, 'the mainland' has been mentioned. This refers to the area from Anatolia to the north of the island, stretching down the Levantine corridor to southern Jordan and Israel. It is from somewhere in this vast region that the first colonisers came from. There are a number of lines of enquiry which can be considered in order to establish the potential origins of the people who first colonised Cyprus. These include the identification of the provenance of imported raw materials such as obsidian and the observation of similarities in technology, burial practice and imagery as interpreted through material culture remains. However, this can be a complex process since the observation of similarities from one region to another cannot be assumed a priori to be proof of origin or even contact, but may reflect simultaneous innovation, nor can differences between two samples eliminate the possibility of association. This is because material culture is often transformed as it moves through time and space as a result of different uses in the new context, or expressions of identity of different social groups. It has been demonstrated that "human agency can result in radical cultural change in short spans of time" (Robb 2001:196) but "not all aspects of culture are transmitted or transformed in the same way, nor to the same degree" (Clarke, forthcoming). Therefore, the question of origins should be approached with caution. The roots of the first Cypriots 'remain elusive' even to those whose research has been focused in this area for many years (Peltenburg et al. 2000: 851). Current research favours Northern Syria (ibid.; Cauvin 2000: 218) but cultural similarities throughout the region make it difficult to identify the precise origin. Consequently, the following discussion does not attempt to reach a conclusive outcome but seeks to present the evidence for possible sources of the founding population. <heading>LITHIC TECHNOLOGY</heading>Over one thousand chipped stone artefacts were recovered from Aetokremnos, all of which were produced from local raw materials (Simmons 2004: 3-4), which demonstrates that they were manufactured on the island and not imported, a fact substantiated by the presence of cores and debitage. A comparative study of the chipped stone assemblage from Aetokremnos, other Cypriot sites and the mainland has been undertaken (Simmons 1999: chapter 11) where it was concluded that no analogues could be demonstrated (ibid.: 281) This study was prior to the publication of excavations at Mylouthkia and Shillourokambos. The Cypriot sites included in this study were Aceramic Neolithic and, as such, were chronologically separated from the Aetokremnos assemblage by several millennia. In view of this fact, it would seem logical to expect a different tool technology while a consistency in lithics despite population discontinuity would appear anomalous! Nevertheless, the Aetokremnos assemblage remains unique in Cyprus despite the Cypro-PPNB discoveries. Simmons' assessment concludes that the specialised nature of the site is responsible for the individual nature of the chipped stone tools, given that pigmy hippopotami or other similar species were not present on the mainland, the requisite tools needed to process the carcasses would not have been manufactured either (1999: 281). Elsewhere it has been stated that the assemblage would not be out of place in Epipalaeolithic or early Neolithic mainland assemblages (Simmons 2004: 3). The distinctive thumbnail scrapers which dominate the assemblage at Aetokremnos, are also found in smaller proportions at Anatolian and Levantine sites of comparable dates (Simmons 1999:319) but the microlithic tools and projectile points which characterise the Natufian and the Early Neolithic respectively, are conspicuous in their absence from this first occupation of Cyprus. The Cypro-PPNB assemblages have been described as "a socially determined mixture of conservatism and change" (McCartney 2004: 118), showing some mainland traits but also developing a character of its own. The lithic assemblages from Mylouthkia and Shillourokambos share a number of characteristics with the mainland: use of high quality raw materials; naviform core technology; and the production of similar tool types (McCartney in Peltenburg et al. 2003:29) although no exact parallels have been found with an single mainland site (McCartney 2004:106). The occurrence of Byblos and Amuq points would seem to suggest a Levantine origin, whereas crescents present at point to an Eastern Anatolian source (Peltenburg et al. 2000: 848). "Cypro-PPNB glossed tools betray Levantine and Anatolian origins" (ibid.). <heading>OBSIDIAN</heading>Obsidian is not a naturally occurring resource in Cyprus and as such, it is ideal for exploring the movement of people in that the colonisers would have needed to bring it with them. It is important to state at this point that there was no obsidian at Aetokremnos (Simmons 2004: 4) so this line of enquiry is specific to the Cypro-PPNB, particularly since the quantity of obsidian on the island declined substantially in the Aceramic Neolithic. Over 300 obsidian blades occur in the early phases at Shilourokambos, whereas it is rare in the later phases. The majority of obsidian at this site is found in the form of small pressure flaked bladelets. In view of the fact that the technique required in to manufacture these blades is not practiced on the island (Guilaine & Briois 2001: 47), it is possible to speculate that obsidian was imported as ready-made tools rather than as raw material. The obsidian from Mylouthkia and Shillourokambos have been subject scientific tests which have established that a Cappadocian provenance, more specifically the Gollü Dağ and Nenezi Dağ areas (Briois et al. 1997; Peltenburg et al. 2003: chapter 2.9). This does not necessarily prove that the people also originated from here, other mechanisms may have been involved. "Il reste toutefois à s'interroger sur les axes de transmission de ces pièces en obsidienne cappadocienne: contacts maritimes directs avec les côtes anatoliennes? Transit par le Levant? On sait que la circulation de l'obsidienne de Cappadoce vers l'aire levantine constitue un circuit de distribution ancien" (Briois et al. 1997: 111). The existence of an exchange network is supported by evidence of Anatolian obsidian found at contemporary Levantine sites, having been the object of long- distance exchange (Bar-Yosef 1998: 199). At Kömürcü-Kaltepe in Central Anatolia the discovery of picrolite, presumably from Cyprus, at an obsidian workshop (Peltenburg 2004: xiv) further strengthens this interpretation. In summary, the obsidian found at Cypro-PPNB sites could have been brought to the island by Anatolian settlers; or by Levantine colonisers who had previously received it from trade links with Cappadocia; or imported by the first Cypriots, whatever their origin, directly from Anatolian exchange contacts. <heading>DOMESTICATES</heading>The faunal assemblage in the early phases at Shillourokambos is comprised of pig, sheep, goat, cattle, Mesopotamian fallow deer, dog and European fox. None of these species are indigenous to the island and it is widely accepted that they were introduced to Cyprus by the first colonisers (Vigne 2001: 56; Peltenburg et al. 2000: 850). Through the comparison of these species with their mainland equivalents, it may be possible to speculate on the origin of the colonising human population through the identification of similar faunal assemblages or progenitors of Cypriot species. "It is extremely unlikely that the initial faunal package that arrived on Cyprus was comprised of animals from a variety of different Near Eastern regions" (Horwitz et al. 2004: 43), so the colonists must have come from an area where all the necessary species exist together. However, this is complicated by the observation that in the wild these species naturally inhabit the same regions (ibid.), making it practically impossible to pinpoint an exact location. Conversely, the domestication of animals on the mainland is "diachronically and geographically heterogeneous" (ibid.) but not all of the species can be assumed to be domesticated. <fnote>This is further discussed below, see 'Imported Domesticates'. </fnote><fnote>See 'Imported Domesticates' below. </fnote>Of the Shillourokambos fauna, the only species evident on the island prior to the Cypro-PPNB is that of pig (Sus scrofa), remains of which were found at Aetokremnos. These early pigs are wild boar (Simmons 1999:167) but those at Shillourokambos are believed to have been domesticated due to their small size (Vigne 2001: 56 but see Horwitz et al. 2004: 40). The relevance of this to the question of origin is that the earliest evidence for domestication of pigs, albeit controversial, occurred in eastern Anatolia (Simmons 1999: 320; Horwitz et al. 2004: 40-43). Therefore, if the small Shillourokambos pigs can be assumed to be domesticated and the Anatolian evidence can be verified, it could be argued that the pigs (and consequently the colonisers) are derived from Anatolian populations. Further research would be required in to substantiate this. <fnote>Fallow deer have also been reported from this site but further examination of the bones has questioned this identification, favouring their classification as pig (Simmons 1999: 167). </fnote><heading>BURIAL PRACTICE AND SCULPTURAL IMAGERY</heading>The Pre Pottery Neolithic A and B on the mainland are characterised by a range of particular burial practices which, although varying slightly between sites appear to share the same underlying ideologies. Some of these types of behaviour, though not all, are also evident in the Cypro-PPNB at Mylouthkia. Well 133, for example, contained the disarticulated remains of at least five individuals, including 4 skulls which seem to have been deposited separately from the skeletons (figure 2). One of these skulls shows evidence of in vivo artificial deformation known as 'occipital deformation' (figure 3) probably caused by the use of a cradleboard (Fox, Lunt & Watt in Peltenburg et al. 2003: 43). This practice is also evident at Khirokitia (Domurad 1989: 67). The remaining 3 skulls were cached further down the well and were found in association with a polished pink conglomerate macehead (Peltenburg et al. 2000: 849). This treatment of skulls could easily be interpreted as part of the same 'skull cult' (Cauvin 2000: 113) being practised throughout Anatolia and the Levant. Similarly, the purposeful deposition of 22 articulated caprine carcasses could be compared to links between animals and humans in mainland burial practices which have been known as early as the Natufian but became more elaborate in the PPNB (Goring-Morris 2000:121; Verhoeven 2002: 252). Verhoeven observed a "chronological and geographical continuity of PPNB ritual practices" which could be expressed as speaking a 'PPNB language' but in different 'dialects' (2002: 244). The Cypro-PPNB could be viewed as an extension of this, as another 'dialect' of the same language. <figure/><figure/>At Shillourokambos, a carved serpentine head of a feline, or perhaps a part feline, part human hybrid (Guilaine & Briois 2001: 51) was recovered from the earliest deposits at the site (figure 4). Parallels have been drawn with a carved cat head from Jerf el Ahmar (ibid. 52) in Northern Syria. In addition to this, engraved pebbles from Shillourokambos have also been connected with Mureybetian examples (ibid. 51) which are present at Jerf el Ahmar, and Mureybet and at the majority of Neolithic sites in the Levant (Cauvin 2000:47- 49). <figure/><heading>PART 3: THE PROCESS OF COLONISATION</heading><heading>PALEOGEOGRAPHY</heading>Through the observation of patterns in the colonisation of Mediterranean islands, Cherry has noted that islands which are larger in size and nearer to the shore are more likely to be colonised before smaller islands further away (Cherry 1981: 52), size being of particular importance since they are more likely to offer a wider range of resources and also because they are more visible (Cherry 1990: 199). Cyprus is the third largest island in the Mediterranean with an area of 9251 km 2. Following Cherry's hypothesis it would be expected that, given its size, Cyprus would be amongst the first islands to be colonised. In addition to size, there are other aspects which need to be considered such as the distance from the mainland and potential difficulty of the journey. There are a number of factors affecting this, including: intervisibility; sea level; presence or absence of a land bridge; 'stepping-stone' islands; direction of currents; sheltered bays for landing; and availability of sea-faring technology. The coastal palaeogeography would have been almost as it is at present by 9000 B.P., with sea levels only 35m lower than today, present levels having been reached by c.5000 B.P. (Simmons 1999: 10-11). This means that the coastline with its rocky shores as seen today would not have been vastly different at the time of colonisation. The abundance of sandy bays distributed around the island (ibid.) would have provided ample opportunities for landing watercraft. Cyprus is located approximately 65km south of Turkey and 105km west of Syria and in clear weather is visible from both coasts (Stanley Price 1977b: 76). Another result of early Holocene sea levels being much the same as modern levels, the distances from the Anatolian and Levantine coasts would not have been much different in antiquity. Sea currents would have made the journey easier from Palestine, despite it being a shorter crossing from Turkey (Peltenburg et al. 2000: 851). The geological origin of Cyprus was the uplift of oceanic plates. The implication of this is that it is very unlikely that a land bridge existed between Cyprus and the mainland (Stanley Price 1980: 1, 1977: 69). This means that in order to reach Cyprus, sea-faring technology must have been developed because there was no opportunity for land-crossing. The sea may not have been as much of an obstacle as is often imagined, as Evans comments "though the sea divides and isolates one community from another, it can also be, in certain respects, a most effective medium of communication between them once adequate water transport becomes available" (1973:518). Sea-faring technology was indeed known in the Mediterranean at an early stage. Obsidian from the Cycladic island of Melos has been found at Franchthi Cave in Greece, in reliable stratigraphic contexts dating to 10880 ± 160 bc (Cherry 1981: 45). This would have involved a journey of 150 kilometres, including crossing expanses of open water up to 20km wide, and presumably multiple trips, all of which suggests a certain level of navigation and control of sea-going vessels as opposed to 'drift-voyages' (ibid.). The discovery of an earlier colonisation of Cyprus than was once presumed (c.f. Stanley Price 1977a: 28) strengthens the argument for pre-Neolithic knowledge of sea-faring, particularly since there are no 'stepping- stone' islands between Cyprus and the mainland to provide the opportunity of island-hopping or coast-hugging to reduce the difficulty of the journey. It has been demonstrated that 'stepping-stone' islands accelerate the rate of immigration and reduce the negative affects of distance (Cherry 1981: 49) but evidence from Cyprus challenges this theory. Not only is it 65 kilometres from the mainland but is without stepping-stone islands and was colonised long before others which do have these islands. For instance, the Cycladic island of Ios was not colonised until the Early Bronze Age (Cherry 1990: 164) but is surrounded by other islands which could have acted as stepping stones. <heading>ENDEMIC PLEISTOCENE FAUNA</heading>It has been documented on a number of islands in the Mediterranean that human colonisation may be responsible for the extinction of the endemic fauna (Cherry 1990:194-197). This may be the consequence of direct human action such as overkill or through indirect processes such as competition with newly introduced species or destruction of habitat. It is not always an instantaneous process, as in the case of the Balearic Islands where there is evidence to suggest that the Myotragus Balearicus co-existed with humans for several thousand years in Mallorca and there have even been some suggestions that they were subject to domestication (Ramis and Bover 2001). In Cyprus, interpreting the relationship between humans and the extinct species Phanourios Minutus is more problematic due to the scarcity of evidence. Despite several unsubstantiated claims for Phanourios bones in association with cultural artefacts (Simmons 1999: 24-25), Akrotiri Aetokremnos is, as yet, the only site which has been verified, while others have been explained away by the idea of 'Neolithic palaeontologists' (Simmons 1991:858) and post-depositional disturbance by antiquarians mistaking the hippopotamus bones for the remains of Christian martyrs and saints (Bunimovitz & Barkai 1996:89). Aetokremnos contained the bones of at least 500 individual pygmy hippopotami (Phanourios minutus) and 3 dwarf elephants (Elephas cypriotes). The faunal remains occurred in two different strata, separated by a sterile layer in between, although it should be noted that the time difference between these strata was too small to be measured in radiocarbon years (Simmons 2001: 5). The basal layer (stratum 4) contained 99% of the hippopotamus bones while stratum 2 contained only 1% but also included the majority of the bird bones and marine invertebrates (Simmons 1991: 859). To Simmons this suggests a scarcity in the availability of hippopotami due to humans over-hunting the declining population which led to a necessary adaptation in subsistence strategy by supplementing the diet with other species but eventually resulted in the abandonment not only of the shelter but of the whole island (1999:323). The evidence provided by Aetokremnos for the extinction of Phanourios Minutus can be used to examine the relationship of humans with endemic Pleistocene fauna in the wider geographical context of the Mediterranean islands in general and the affect colonisation may have had on these faunal populations. Given that similar themes are explored throughout the Mediterranean, it may prove useful to make comparisons, when relevant, between islands rather than treating them as separate laboratories (Evans 1973:520). Even if they were not in contact with each other, similar environmental, social or economical factors may have affected the behaviour of the various groups. <heading>IMPORTED DOMESTICATES</heading>As previously mentioned, the import of domesticated species has been taken as evidence for deliberate colonisation (Cherry 1990: 198). Pig bones have been found at Aetokremnos but since these are only represented by phalanges and metapodials, it is thought that they arrived on the island as part of a piece of skin for clothing or bedding (Simmons 1999: 167). This does not represent the import of animals so is excluded from this discussion. Shillourokambos has yielded the remains of fallow deer, pigs, cattle and caprine species, all of which were introduced to the island (Vigne 2001: 55). With the exception of pig, these species were still morphologically wild (ibid.: 56) but as Croft points out, behavioural changes would have taken place before morphological alterations (Croft in Peltenburg et al. 2003: 56) so domestication cannot be ruled out. The fact that these fauna arrive together as part of a package at the same time as human colonisation indicates that they were deliberately imported by the first settlers (Horwitz et al. 2004: 35), despite lack of physical signs of domestication. There is also a structural feature comprising of a series of postholes arranged in two parallel rows which has been interpreted as an animal enclosure (Guilaine & Briois 2001: 41) which would seem to argue for the herding, management or 'pre-domestication' (Vigne 2001: 57) of these animals. A similar situation is reflected by the plant remains. Excavations at Mylouthkia revealed early domesticated plants including domestic einkorn (Triticum monococcum) and emmer wheat types (Triticum dicoccum) and hulled-barley (Hordeum sativum). These taxa must have been brought with the colonisers since there is no evidence indicating that the wild species are native to the island (Peltenburg et al. 2001: 70-71). Whether fully domesticated or 'pre-domestic', the floral and faunal species being exploited in the Cypro-PPNB were certainly transported to the Cyprus by humans, thus substantiating Cherry's claim that the presence of domesticated species on islands can be taken as evidence of deliberate colonisation. <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>The discoveries at Aetokremnos and the Cypro-PPNB sites necessitated a total reassessment of the colonisation of Cyprus, pushing it back by several millennia. This evidence is not just relevant to Cypriot archaeology but has wider implications for research into colonisation of the Mediterranean islands and island archaeology in general. Cherry acknowledged that "as always, future finds may radically modify the picture" (1981: 44), at a time when pre-Neolithic remains were rare in island contexts, and even then occurred almost exclusively on islands which could have been reached by land at the time of colonisation (ibid.: 45). Even if Aetokremnos is discounted as 'visitation' rather than a true colonisation episode, radiocarbon dates from Shillourokambos and Mylouthkia still place colonisation of Cyprus in the 10 th millennium B.P. despite the distance from the mainland and lack of landbridge or 'stepping-stone' islands. This does not correspond with the colonisation model put forward by Cherry (1981;1990), but proves that "anomalies are as important as goodness-of-fit" (Cherry 1990: 146). The Cypriot evidence serves as a pertinent reminder that even the most widely accepted paradigms can be undermined by the discovery of new evidence and that an open-minded approach is needed even when confronted with controversial evidence like that from Aetokremnos. It also shows that although the observation of patterns in the colonisation of Mediterranean islands is useful in the initial stages of research, the complexity of the process of colonisation requires the detailed study of individual islands in addition to the generalised Mediterranean-wide model. Similarities with Anatolian and Levantine sites provide some indication of the origin of the first population to colonise Cyprus. This can provide insight into the process of colonisation in terms of sea-faring ability and the distances within the capabilities of the founding population. Research in this area can also lead on to further investigations which lie beyond the scope of this discussion, such as the reasons why the island was colonised. Was it the result of demographic stress forcing the mainland population to 'marginal areas' (Cherry 1981: 59) or simply part of the spread of agriculture with no distinction made between islands and mainland Europe (Finlayson 2004: 21)? In the words of Donne, "no man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main" and the same can be said of Cyprus during this period. It is not isolated entity bounded by an impassable sea, but is an extension of the mainland. In order to fully understand the process of island colonisation, the archaeological evidence needs to be studied within the context of a wider cultural framework encompassing both the mainland and the surrounding seascape. <fnote>John Donne, 'Meditation XVII'.  URL  </fnote>