<heading>Introduction</heading>The growth of a plant is influenced by various endogenous and exogenous factors. The components of the environment in which the plant lives, such as temperature, the duration and the intensity of available sunlight, alter the favorableness of the growth. With time, the plant progress the developmental stages which starts from the vegetative growth of the plant body into the reproductive growth. The aim of this experiment was to analyse the processes of the development of a plant, the Dwarf French Bean (Phaseolus vulgaris). <heading>Method</heading><heading>Part 1:continuous assessment of the growth. </heading>Week 0 20 fresh beans and 4 pots were provided to each pair of students. 4 beans were planted in each pot in vermiculite about 1 cm below the soil surface. Some dried and fresh beans were weighted as the week 0 sample. Week 1 to 9 The recordings of the following measurements of the vegetative plant were continuously practiced each week. The measurement was done for both fresh and dry samples. <list>・the weight of cotyledon・the weight and the length of shoot. ・the weight of leaves and the total leaf area.・the weight and the number of buds.・the weight and the number of flowers.・the weight and the number of fruits.・the total plant weight.</list><heading>Part 2: temperature treatment</heading>Several bean pods were prepared and were kept at five different temperatures of 14, 18, 22, 26, and 30 ° in the factorial glass house. The measurement of the total plant and pod weights, shoo length, leaf area was taken place after 8 weeks. The numbers of leaves, flowers and pods were counted. The dried plant weight was measured after the 1-week drying period. <heading>Discussion / Conclusion</heading><heading>Part 1: continuous assessment of the growth. </heading>The growth of a plant is regulated step by step according to the developmental stages of the organism. The Cotyledon which first emerged from a seed and starts autotrophic metabolism grew in week 1 but degenerated after the development of the first true leaves in week 2 and completely disappeared in week 5 (Fig 1). The negative figure of Relative Growth Rate (Fig 8) for the first 2 weeks were due to the deterioration of cotyledon and the actual growth of vegetative organs, i.e. leaves and shoots were high. The shoot had its highest growth rate at week 1 (Fig 7). Although it gradually decreased with time, the growth of the shoots was relatively constant. The shoot length reached at the maximum height at week 7 when the plants were fully grown (Fig 2). The higher rate of the growth of shoots during the final 2 weeks mainly occurred in the parts of apical and axillary buds where the fruits were to be formed. Thus, in the first vegetative growth period, the growing parts of the shoots were concentrated on the vertical and horizontal directions to increase the amount of incoming radiation to leaves and to accelerate the assimilation of sources, and shifted into the parts for the production of harvestable components. The growth of leaves was closely related to that of shoots. The growth rate continuously increased over time and the maximum rate was at week 7 (Fig 7). The Leaf Weight Ratio was very high in the weeks 2 to 4 when the assimilation partitioning was mainly on leaves (Fig 10). With an increase in the photosynthetic ratio of leaves, the growth of the sizes was stimulated. Leaf Area Ratio which corresponds to the capacity of leaves to catch the incoming radiation showed the highest value in week 4 (Fig 11) and the changing patterns of Specific Leaf Area were simultaneous to those of the other growth parameters on leaves and it was at the maximum in week 5 (Fig 12). By increasing the number, weight, and sizes of leaves, the plant was to achieve the higher yielding of photosynthesis and hence, the source assimilation before the production of reproductive organs was accumulated. The growth of leaves began to decrease after the week 5 and the plant developed into the reproductive period (Fig 7). The buds started to emerge in week 6, the flowering and fruiting were taken place. Due to the differences in the time of maturity among the individual plants, the flowering period varied (Fig 4). As mentioned, Relative Growth Rate in weeks 1 and 2 can be omitted for the analysis (Fig 8). The accurate estimation of during the weeks 3 and 4 is very difficult without any reliable data, hence, it can vary, however, it was presumed to be the highest of all periods. The growth of a plant is divided into some phases (Ross & Salisbury, 1992). The logarithm phase, when the seeds emerge and the primary growth of a plant starts, the growth rate is low which was between the weeks 0 and 2 in this experiment. During the next linear phase, the growth rate increases with time and the maximum rate can be observed which might have been at some time between the weeks 2 and 4. The final reproductive development is expressed as the senescence phase and there is a decline in the growth rate. In this experiment, it was slightly bigger in week 8 than in week 7 which was estimated to be because of the increase in the weight of pods. The patterns of Net Assimilation Rate shifted from the assimilation to sources, i.e. leaves into sinks, i.e. pods by week 7 (Fig 9). <heading>Part 2: temperature treatment</heading>The plants grown at 14° showed the poorest performance of all. Although those plants successfully reached to the flowering as the number of flowers was the greatest (Fig 2.5), the growth was very slow and the yield would be low. On the other hand, those at 30° achieved fast growth with the longest shoot length and the largest number of leaves (Fig 2.3 & 2.5). With high temperature, those plants reached to the maturity quickly, however, the earlier production of fruits meant the poor harvest. The pod weight was very low and Harvest Index was low with 40% (Fig 2.2 & 2.10). Despite of the fact that those plants yield more leaves and pods per plant, the sizes of leaves, i.e. the area and the productivity were much smaller compared to the others (Fig 2.4). This can also be estimated from the small figures of Specific Leaf Area and Leaf Area Ratio (Fig 2.7 & 2.9). For the plants at 26°, Harvest Index was the highest of 83 % (Fig 2.10). However, the pod weight was smaller than those at 18 and 22° (Fig 2.2). The growth of plants in terms of the level of maturity was very high for those at 18 and 22°. From this experiment, it was concluded that the plants at 26° were highly productive without the need to grow bigger in size, but the harvest can be greater for the lower temperatures of about 20°, if the plants were given longer time before the harvest. Hence, for the vegetative growth of this plant, the optimum temperature was about 20°, and for the early and high production of the harvest, i.e. for forcing, the optimum temperature would be about 26°. 