<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>The effects of tillage in autumn on the rate of litter decomposition over winter and on soil invertebrate diversity and abundance in the following spring were investigated. The experiment was carried out from October 2005 to February 2006 in Sonning farm at the University of Reading, U.K. There was a total of 12 blocks with tilled and control plots in each block, a set of litter in mesh bags; one on the soil surface and the other buried at 15 cm in depth, was set up in each plot. The soil was sampled from each plot in spring from which invertebrate diversity (the number of organisms and species abundance) was investigated. % loss of litter weight was analysed, there was no significant correlation with control and tilled treatments or with surface and buried treatments. The identified invertebrates were too small in number to carry out statistical analysis. There suggested various biases in the experiment such as low temperature over winter which reduced the activities of soil fauna, the size of blocks, the long-term land management prior to the experiment, and the duration of study, all of which were probably not effective to differentiate the soil community structure. The results pointed out the complexity and the inconsistent responses of soil ecosystem under agriculture which pose difficulty in examining the functioning of soil food web. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Soil ecosystem in relation to interaction between soil organisms and physical, chemical properties of soil and flora is important in regulating above-ground ecosystem, yet its function is not well understood. Soil invertebrates are comprised of microfauna (e.g. protozoa, fungi, viruses), mesofauna (e.g. Collembola, mites), and macrofauna (e.g. earthworms, beetles, invertebrate larvae). Those numerous organisms form a complex food web. Species composition at a particular depth is determined by soil physical structure (e.g. temperature, aeration, porosity, water content), and by the availability of food resources such as litter, roots and fauna (Adl, 2003. Coleman & Crossley, 2003). Many macrofauna species contribute to decomposition of litter through initial fragmentation and comminution of materials. Macroarthropods, earthworms, onychophorans, and gastropods feed on litter and their chewing activities make it break down into small fragments (Adl, 2003). Initial decomposition is stimulated by the salivary secretions and excretion of digested litter. Saprotrophs colonise those materials and proceed to further decomposition process. In addition, predation of a soil organism by another has significant effects on litter decomposition. For instance, mites feed on bacteriophagus nematodes and regulate the decomposition rate by keeping the balance of species abundance and decomposition process (Killham, 1994). Agroecosystem can alter the functional performance of this complex food web. Tillage, crop selection and rotation, pest management are the major anthropogenic inputs in agricultural practice (Edwards & Bohlen, 1996). In terms of the effects of tillage on soil community, Wardle et al (1995) suggested three principal factors which modify the soil food web structure; 1. soil physical disruption, 2. residue distribution, and 3. weed density, from the comparative study of the responses of soil organisms under different management of no-tillage and conventional tillage. According to this review, large soil organisms are vulnerable to physical disruption due to their body sizes, while small organisms are less affected or sometimes stimulated. Under no-tillage system, plant residue is accumulated at soil surface which host many soil organisms, thus this upper soil profile become the most important regulator of the soil community. Burial of litter by cultivation leads to the accretion of food resources below ground and changes soil physical properties such as temperature, moisture content, and aeration, stimulating particular micro- and meso-fauna species at ploughed depth, and the decomposition rate is likely to be increased. Above-ground plant community structure, particularly the presence of symbiotic nitrogen-fixing legume species, and associating changes in microclimate is important in providing a certain physical and chemical environmental condition for soil organisms. In the U.K, it is suggested that changes in agriculture practice, for example, changes in crop species and the accompanied change in the timing of tillage have caused disturbance in soil ecosystem, resulting in the decline of larger animals primarily bird species, the diet of which is heavily dependent upon soil biota (van Emden & Rothschild, 2004). Introduced new crop species, use of pesticides and inorganic fertilizers, land intensification, and use of machinery may have been the major factors for the modification of soil ecosystem. In addition, although the extent of study outcomes are not yet satisfactory to confirm this correlation, tillage in autumn, removal of litter over winter have probably diminished the abundance and activities of soil organism, hence available food resources for birds (Coleman & Crossley, 2003. Killham, 1994). The aim of this experiment was to examine the effects of autumn tillage on plant litter decomposition rate and the structure of soil ecosystem based on three hypotheses; 1. Autumn tillage has no effect on soil invertebrate diversity and abundance in the following spring. 2. Buried plant litter decomposes at the same rate as plant litter on the soil surface. 3. Autumn soil tillage does not affect the rate of plant litter decomposition. <heading>MATERIALS AND METHODS</heading><heading>Study site</heading>The experiment was carried out at University Sonning farm from October 2005 to March 2006. The field site has been left unmanaged for several years, so it had become to be covered with various grass species at the beginning of this study in autumn. The experimental plot was in a flat plain without tall vegetation nearby, surrounded by arable grassland under other research. The predominant soil type was clay or sandy clay to the investigated depth of about 15 cm. <heading>Methods</heading>5 g of air-dried litter was weighed and was put in a mesh bag. Each bag was attached with labels. 12 blocks were randomly designed within the site, each with two adjacent plots of no-tillage and tillage treatments. Plots in 50 cm ×50 cm were measured with quadrats, three corners were marked with plastic sticks. For tillage treatment, the soil was ploughed with a spade to approximately 10 to 15 cm in depth. A litter bag was buried at about 15 cm in depth in each treatment, and another bag was placed on the soil surface of each treatment with nails. Hence, each block was comprised of two buried bags, two surface ones each in tilled and control plots. After the setting up in November 8 th, litter bags were left over winter until sampling on February 28 th. Litter bags were carefully removed from the sites. Litter samples were transferred to paper bags to be air-dried for a couple of weeks. Any soil was removed from air-dried litter sample on sorting trays and the final litter weight was recorded. <figure/>One soil sample from each plot was taken by an auger of 8cm in diameter and 10 cm in depth (approximately 502.4 ml). 120 ml of each soil sample was put on a Tullgren funnel, over a cup with 70% alcohol and under a light bulb for a week to extract invertebrates. After a couple of weeks, the rest of soil sample was emptied on sorting trays, macro- and meso-fauna were hand sorted with forceps and paintbrushes and were placed in a sample bottle with 70% alcohol. Invertebrates obtained from the Tullgren samples and hand-sorting were identified. <heading>Statistical analysisLitter decomposition</heading>The difference between the initial litter weight and the final litter weight was calculated for each sample. % mass loss was obtained and was analysed by two-way ANOVA, examining the correlation between burial and surface, tillage and non-tillage treatments and the interaction between all treatments. <heading>Invertebrate diversity</heading>The numbers of individual invertebrates and species diversity was supposed to be compared with difference of tillage and no -tillage treatments. However, due to small number of data obtained and loss of data of hand-sorting samples, statistical analysis was unable to carry out. <heading>RESULTS</heading><heading>Litter decomposition</heading>A total of 48 samples; 12 samples from each treatment was investigated. There were exceptionally low values of 14.13% in a control/surface sample and of 21.11% in control/buried one while the others exceeded 30%. Averages of four different treatments were 37.71% in control/surface, 40.65% in control/buried, 34.20% in tilled/surface, and 38.49% in tilled/buried, all ranged in relatively small scale of difference, less than 6.4% difference (fig. 1). Average % loss of buried litter samples was higher than that of surface ones in both control and tilled treatments by 2.94% and 2.29% respectively. In two-way ANOVA, % mass loss was not significantly correlated either with tilled and control treatments (P= 0.226) or with surface and buried (P= 0.124). When the interaction of all four treatments was analysed, there was no significant correlation (P= 0.772) (table. 1). <figure/><table/><heading>Invertebrate diversity</heading>The results of hand-sorted samples were not available for analysis due to loss of the original data. A total of 28 soil samples were obtained. Although there were more invertebrates found by hand-sorting, only a couple of organisms were identified in the funnel samples. There were a total of 7 individuals of 5 species present in control treatments and 2 individuals of 2 different species in tilled ones. Because of these low values, statistical analysis was not undertaken. <heading>DISCUSSION</heading><heading>Litter decomposition</heading>There was no significant correlation between % loss of litter weight and any treatment. The primary factor which affected those small differences in litter decomposition may be season; coldness. The experiment was carried out over winter when most of soil invertebrates species become inactive and decomposition process slows down due to low temperature (Dickinson & Pugh, 1974. Lavelle & Spain, 2001). Patterns of mass loss of plant litter after it fell on the soil surface in autumn are divided into three phases of; 1. A rapid decrease through loss of fast metabolisable compounds and readily leacheable nutrients, 2. Slow change over winter, and 3. A gradual increase in the rate of decomposition from late spring when biological activities and chemical activities in soil ecosystem become more active with prolonged day length and increased temperature (Coleman & Crossley, 2003). In this experimentt, the fact that a very small number of soil invertebrates were sampled from the soil cores indicated the inactiveness of soil organisms during the experimental period. Hence, there was not substantial difference in the conditions of litter between the treatments. When the soil samples were taken from the field site in February, many grass species had started to recolonise the ground in control plots, while there remained almost bare in tilled ones. Although vegetation coverage was much greater in control treatments than in tilled, which would have stimulated the assemblage of soil fauna including important detritivore in the former with diverse rooting system (Wardle, 2002), cold climate could have been a major constraint for the decomposition process other than biological factors (Adl, 2003. Coleman & Crossley, 2003). Correlation with surface or buried conditions seemed slightly strongly shown than tillage difference (P= 0.124, P=0.226 respectively). This may have been a result of changes in food web structure by litter burial. Activities of soil microfauna and mesofauna are increased by the burial of litter as larger amount of food sources become available to those live in deeper depth (Hendrix, et al,. 1992. Phillips, & Phillips, 1984). Thus, decomposition rate is likely to be faster in buried litter than that on surface one and it is more increased by tillage operation (Coleman & Crossley, 2003). However, this experiment did not show statistical significance to support those outcomes between difference conditions. Hence, the decomposition rate of buried plant litter and that of litter on the soil surface was not significantly different (hypothesis 2) and there was no clear correlation between the decomposition rate and tillage treatment in autumn (hypothesis 3). There are some suggestions of biases caused in this study. First, size of mesh can result in overestimation or underestimation of mass loss inside the bags (Coleman & Crossley, 2003). Small mesh can exclude large invertebrate species such as earthworms which are essential in initial decomposition process. However, large mesh sizes allow loss of litter out of the bags (Adl, 2003). The size of mesh used in this experiment was relatively large so that there was some possibility of transportation of litter by soil fauna which has led to overestimate the rate of decomposition. On the other hand, there were some very large invertebrates, e.g. earthworms of longer than 5 cm, thicker than 3mm in diameter which could have been excluded from the mesh bags, decreasing the rate of decomposition. Secondly, use of mesh bags may have caused modifications of microclimate within the bags. Mesh bags usually create moister microclimate inside which is favoured by microbes, hence the rate of decomposition is increased (Vossbrinck, et al. 1979). In addition, nails, plastic sticks and other experimental tools may have resulted in physical changes in the environment. Although the extent of influence is not clear, there can be some sources of errors in experimental design. Thirdly, litter used in this study was air-dried wheat straw but the field had not been under cultivation presumably for a few years so that plant community was not similar to that formed under crop production system. There was uncertainty whether soil organisms preferably fed on fresh, abundant plant species or dried wheat straws added to the site with different chemical composition. It is argued that chemical content of a plant species, such as Carbon, Nitrogen, polyphenol was a factor which determines the decomposition rate (Coleman & Crossley, 2003. Adl, 2003). This study only measured the loss of litter weight from the start to the end of the experimental period, hence there is no available data on the chemical decomposition process in details. There may be some differences in the process between plant species which were not examined in this experiment in addition to variation in decomposition between plants in mesh bags and those in the soil. Finally, the size of blocks may have been too small (Adl, 2003) and the duration of disturbance by tillage may have been not significant to modify the soil community. Plots of tillage and control treatments were located adjacent to each other and the size of a plot was 50×50 cm (50×100 cm with two blocks together in a block). The field site had not been under cultivation prior to the experiment with high diversity in terms of plant community. This might have been inadequate for the aim of study to differentiate the activities of soil organisms between the tillage treatments. Soil organisms may have been migrated from one block to another irrespective of tillage disturbance, resulting in the elimination of effects of human management. <heading>Invertebrate diversity</heading>Collected data of both number of individuals and species diversity were insufficient to measure the difference of invertebrates' responses to tillage and no-tillage treatments by statistical analysis. As shown in the decomposition rate, the most important factor that caused these low numbers of invertebrates collected in this experiment may be cold temperature over winter (Dickinson & Pugh, 1974. Lavelle & Spain, 2001). In fact, temperature had been very low, probably lower than 5° for a couple of days before the sampling, so that substantial number of invertebrates, if present, may have moved deeper than the depth of soil core of 10 cm. Another cause of sampling failure may be the method of invertebrate extraction with funnel. Tullgren funnel under light bulb as heat source was used in this study, but the efficiency of extraction is dependent upon the soil type and invertebrate species. For example, Collembola is likely to stay in the soil which clumps together (Adl, 2003), i.e. clay soil, hence remain in the funnel. Among the total of 12 soil cores sampled, most of the soil was clay-type. Although clods were crushed into smaller fragments by hands in setting-up operation for extraction, this stickiness and clusters of soil may have made extraction difficult. In addition, the amount of soil taken from the whole soil sample was very small, 120 ml from approximately 502.4 ml, hence reduced the possibility of collecting the satisfactory number of organisms. In fact, when all the soil was hand sorted, there were much more number of invertebrates found, particularly from the control samples with some living grasses attached. As data were lost, it is not persuadable to argue the likely effects of the treatments on the results only with observation. However, there seemed a certain difference between the samples of tillage and no-tillage in hand sorting samples. The number of individual organisms was higher in control samples than that in tilled ones in many cases. One possible explanation to this result may be the presence of reestablishing grass species in control samples which formed complex rooting systems, provided variety of food resources that increased the assemblage of fungi, bacteria, and invertebrates (Titi, 2003). Hence, there might have been some correlation between autumn tillage and invertebrates diversity in following spring. The undisturbed soil my have higher possibility of containing well-preserved seed bank which would lead to the establishment of diverse plant community at early spring, whilst the ploughed soil my have been reduced the possibility of such recovery within a short period of time (Andrade et al. 2003). Furthermore, block design and the long-term management of the site prior to the experiment may have caused inaccuracy of this study. As already discussed, plot size was 50×50 cm which may not restricted the migration of organisms between the blocks to the expected extent. The field may have needed several years of management practice to affect biological community structure in the soil food web. However, one study argued that the reduction in predatory arthropods population recovered up to the same level as found in no-tillage treatment within a few months after the tillage treatment (Stinner, et al. 1986). It was probably due to high dispersibility of those species, but the reason for recolonisation of cultivated area was not certain. There seemed variation in the responses of invertebrate species to the disturbance and to changes in habitat (Wardle, 1995), but it may be important to consider the duration, intensity of tillage inputs in the long-term in order to examine the modification in the soil food web. In spite of insufficient amount of data collected in this study, there is increasing number of studies which investigated the correlation of the responses of invertebrate community, or particular species or functional groups with agricultural management, such as tillage, crop species and its rotation. It would be possible to estimate some probable outcomes from this study by referring to other available research. Many findings imply the difficulty of estimating the effects of tillage on species number and diversity due to high variety in both terms, but there were some notable responses of particular invertebrate species which may be induced by this management. Periodic disturbance by tillage can have an impact on the development of earthworm population and its life cycle (Edwards & Lofty, 1982). Increased interspecific competition in the soil, reduction of food resources, and increased predation risk when earthworms were brought out to the soil surface by turn over of soil, may lead to influence the relative proportion of earthworm population size. Some studies suggested the importance of abiotic factors affecting this species such as soil water content and temperature; 10 to 20° is suitable condition for their growth in agroecosystem and 20° is the optimum (Edwards & Shuster, 2003). Physical damages, i.e. dismemberment, seemed not to be significant to most species of earthworms, but many studies support the preference of no-tillage system by those measurements (Edwards & Shuster, 2003). Much smaller soil organisms; microfauna showed different responses to tillage disturbance, mainly as a result of their particular ecological need (Titi, 2003). Mites rely on their dispersal pathway on pores, borrows, and tubes of partially decomposed plant tissues, hence, changes in soil physical structure by tillage can have negative effects on the requirement for their survival (Titi, 2003). On the other hand, Collembola demonstrate high adaptation depending on species. Some species are resilient to solar radiation, abrupt temperature change which may be caused by tillage operation (Titi, 2003). Loring et al (1981) found that tillage can stimulate soil dweller Collembola population moslty in the short term after tillage due to favorable changes in nutrient availability, reformation of pore spaces, and other physical properties of the soil. No-tillage system in comparison was likely to result in higher density of Collembola in total, but difference in population between tilled and no-tilled systems seemed declined over time which may imply their high adaptability (Titi, 2003). Feeding patterns are important factors that determine the responses of invertebrate species to tillage (Wardle, 2002). Plant-parasitic Nematoda species were much vulnerable to cultivation than other Nematoda species probably by the direct effects of burial or removal of plants, destroying their host environment. However, the effects of tillage, though evident, were not consistent between different Nematoda species in many studies (Titi, 2003). Those investigation suggested several points of tillage effects on soil invertebrates; 1. increase in management intensity lead to raise the level of disturbance to soil ecosystem, 2. modification in species diversity, abundance would be induced not only by direct or indirect changes in the soil habitat but in liaison with relationship between functional groups (Wardle, 2002. Titi, 2003). However, many findings agree that selection of crop species is the most important regulator on the functioning of soil food web and the degree of disturbance is variable according to other farming managements including pest management, organic matter application (Titi, 2003. Wardle, 2002. Adl, 2003). For this experiment, the amount and quality of data required accuracy and effectiveness to argue the likely effects of autumn tillage on soil invertebrate diversity and abundance to be supported by statistical analysis (hypothesis 1). <heading>CONCLUSION</heading>There was no statistically significant outcome which supported the correlation between soil invertebrate diversity, the rate of decomposition, and the tillage treatment in autumn. This study probably had a major problem in biases in the experimental design to obtain sufficient amount of responses from soil ecosystem, there are many possible improvements as suggested. There are increasing numbers of studies which would be referred to estimate the likely effects of autumn tillage on agroecosystems. In general, although not consistent in many cases, there seemed to have some negative effects of tillage operation on soil ecosystem in terms of disturbance, leading to the modification in the community structure. The question is still not well answered and research is under development. In conclusion, this study highlighted the difficulty of investigating the functioning of soil ecosystem under agricultural practice due to its complexity and inconsistent responses for anthropogenic disturbance. Further research is expected to apply this outcome. 