<heading>Introduction</heading>Census is a very practicable parameter in investigating the correlation with flora and fauna and a certain area over which the wildlife ranges, however, none of the techniques can be perfect due to the biases or errors and the time or the availability of the resources such as the amount of fund and the number of observers both of which are limited. The objectives of the bird census for housing development project at Theale gravel pit complex were followings; What bird species breed at the site and how many breeding pairs are present. What bird species and how many individuals are present during the winter. How the various duck species use the gravel pits and which of these are the most important for them. Tree census on three tree species of Japanese hackberry Celtis sinensis, Quercus actissima and Quercus serrata at plain broadleaf woodland aimed to estimate the population density of those three tree species to research on the habitat availability and the conditions for butterfly species Sasakia charonda. This report will identify and evaluate the available techniques for each of the studies. <heading>Part 1: Bird census at Theale gravel pit complex</heading><heading>1.1: Evaluation of Bird Census Techniques</heading>A number of methods are widely practiced in bird census such as territory mapping, line transects, and point census. One may be suitable for a particular observation while it can be not applicable in other cases. <heading>1) Territory mapping</heading>The sturdy area is divided into plots to be observed in a single 3 to 4 hour visit using a map usually 1:25000 scale (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996). It is important to select the plots according to the vegetation or habitat characteristics to avoid edge effects so that in the gravel pits case, species with complex patterns in nesting and feeding habitats may decrease the precision on the data. The visits need to be several times throughout the suitable seasons. This method is the most applicable for singing birds with territoriality and the observation during the breeding seasons which there are often clear territories for each species (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996). Tape-recorded play back, consecutive flush, although the latter often causes disturbance to birds, and nest-finding can be supplementary methods, depending on the features and the number of target species (Bibby,. et al. 1997). One disadvantage of this technique is that it requires a long period of time with enough fund and observers. It is not suitable for species without territorial behaviour and migrants. In terms of singing behaviour, the higher rate of singing by unpaired birds can mislead the population size in some cases (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996). Hence, references to historical records would be needed prior to the census to check if there were any species that apply to those features in the gravel pit. However, this method is a good measurement to study on the relationship between the distribution of species in a certain area and the habitat. <heading>2) Line transects </heading>The chosen transects in the area are walked or driven by observers within a set period of time in this method. Large area of land or sea with uniform, relatively open, features over hundreds of metres are suitable. The transects need to be widely spaced to avoid the overlapping of the observations (Bibby,. et al. 1997). This technique is less time-consuming than the territory map and is not subject to the time of year (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996). The randomisation of the transects and the routes may cause difficulty due to the physical accessibility of the site particularly like the gravel pit. <heading>3) Point census</heading>The observation is done by standing on a particular point in the habitat and by counting all the birds caught in eyes during the fixed time scale (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996). This method is easy to collect a large volume of data in a short time and can be done at anytime of year. The allocation of the counting points is more randomised than line transects and this is suitable in dense habitat or in clumped flocks (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996). Distinguishable birds are appropriate in this technique, however, it is not suitable for the species that are easily disturbed by the surroundings and the distance from the observer and the difference in song patterns also affect on the probability of the detection of individual birds, resulting in the higher occurrence of nearer, characteristic birds than further, less detectable ones (Sutherland. 1996). <heading>4) Other methods</heading>Other available techniques are catch-per-unit effort, which is also called mist nesting, mark-release-recapture, dropping counts, timed species counts, and vocal individuality. Most of the methods are usually species specific or dependent on the particular objective of the study (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996). <heading>1.2: Bird Census at Theale gravel pit complex</heading>Territory Mapping will be an appropriate technique to survey on the bird species at Theale gravel pit. Due to constrain that this method is time-consuming, the balance with the budget on the project needs to be well organised, Although there are some strengths and weaknesses compared to other techniques as described, as a whole, it is very useful to compare species abundance, population and distribution patterns in a characteristic area like the gravel pit (BTO, 2005. BBS, 2005, Bucknell,. et al. 1996). Therefore, it is expected that the collected data will fulfill the required outcome with good precision. In addition, there are well established data over a long period of time available for comparison. Taking account the seasonal variation in species, early April to the end of July is the best time for breeding species in summer and from late November to the end of February for wintering birds, and visit hours should also be clearly planned (Bibby,. et al. 1997, Sutherland. 1996, Bucknell,. et al. 1996). There are some additional species specific methods to be performed. For colonial nesting birds, apparently occupied nesting accounts will be recommended. Photography, if possible, may be helpful and reduce the hour of field work. The greater care in carrying out the census is required in this case, for example, Sand Martin (Ripariaq riparia) which is likely to form arrogated colonies on the slope of sand cliff, can mislead the population estimate due to the failure in plot allocations (BTO, 2005. BBS, 2005, Bucknell,. et al. 1996, Bibby,. et al. 1997). The nocturnal species should be surveyed differently, after dark and early in the year during breeding season for Tawny owl (Strix aluco) (Bucknell,. et al. 1996). Alternatively, the survey during the intense territorial activity from October to December is also recommended. Since this species is the territorial male, the identification of territory boundaries between individual males together with the record of clusters can also be done (Bibby,. et al. 1997). In this case at Theale gravel pit, the former may be relevant in terms of effective comparison of data. <heading>Part 2: Tree census in broadleaf woodland to study on the species status of great purple emperor butterfly Sasakia charonda and its habitat availability</heading>Great purple emperor butterfly Sasakia charonda used to spread throughout Japan and was designated as national butterfly in 1957. butterflies are commonly found in relatively large plain broadleaf woodlands where three tree species of Celtis sinensis, Quercus actissima and Quercus serrata. are abundant. Eggs are laid on the ground nearby a large mature Japanese hackberry tree Celtis sinensis and larvae are monophagous on the leaves of this tree species and herbernate beneath the fallen leaves under their host trees. When reached maturity, adult butterflies only feed on the sap of either Quercus actissima or Quercus serrata (Tsukuba CEM, 2005). This specific feeding requirement has been a cause of the drastic decline in the population in the last few decades accompanied with the fragmentation of broadleaf woodlands, resulting in the species to be listed on the National Red List Data (Wikipedia, 2005). However, scientific research in terms of measuring the population size and its relationship with the areas, species abundance of the vegetation or other features of the habitat has not been developed in sufficient quantity to establish a conservation scheme (Kitahara,. et al. 2004). While the population census on the butterfly provides vital information on the species status, the survey on the host tree species is also highly required and useful to estimate the habitat availability and likely changes in the butterfly population in the future. In fact, the population census on the tree species is more widely practiced (Kitahara,. et al. 2004, Tsukuba CEM, 2005. Tochigi CEM.2005) partly because of the relative ease and effectiveness in study in terms of time and cost. Therefore, tree census may be appropriate in investigating the conditions of the habitat and butterflies in an area of woodland. <heading>2.1: Evaluation of Tree Census techniques</heading>There are several methods used in the plant census. Total counts, needless to say, is the most accurate measurement of the population, however, it is very time-consuming (Sutherland. 1996). Visual estimate of cover is also applicable in estimating the species relative coverage in a particular area of land, and can be done quickly. The disadvantage is the subjectivity of the measurement by individual observers (Sutherland. 1996). In addition, it can be technically difficult to carry out in woodland where there are often many tree species of various ages and conditions with other shrub or grass species at different layers. In frame quadrats, the study area is divided into a certain unit area for instance, 400 to 25000 m² for trees in forests. Various measurements, including the density, percentage cover of the surveyed species are also taken place within the quadrats (Sutherland. 1996. Kitahara,. et al. 2004). Although this technique may be time-consuming, the advantage is the large amount of data to be collected in a single observation. Transects such as line or belt transects, are particularly useful in the sampling of minor or distinct species in the area. The percentage cover and the density measurement are needed to be carefully considered, or may not be suitable in this method due to the inclination of higher frequency toward large individuals or species in the transects (Sutherland. 1996). <heading>2.2: Tree Census at plain broadleaf woodland</heading>In this particular case in woodland, frame quadrats may be the most proper method, providing a relatively accurate estimate of the species density in the area and individual percentage cover within the unit area. The compassion of data with each quadrat is also useful in examining the minimum requirements of the habitat area to support a certain population size of the butterfly and the optimal characteristics of the different tree species in the habitat, such as spacing between the individual trees or abundance in relation to host and non-feeding tree species (Kitahara,. et al. 2004). The allocation of quadrat size according to the woodland size is very important and affect on the over- or under- estimation of coverage, density of any measurement. This method can be very time-consuming depending on the size of the study area , the abundance of target tree species, and the geographical features such as topography may cause physical constrains in some cases. If available, aerial photography or satellite images would help to raise the precision of information in the survey, although the detail analysis on specific tree species may be technically difficult since the canopy structure of Celtis sinensis, Quercus actissima and Quercus serrata and other co-existing tree species may be sometimes similar. Overall, this frame quadrats technique is usually used in the related survey in the past (Kitahara,. et al. 2004) with which the comparison of data is possible, and therefore, recommended. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Two examples of bird and tree census have demonstrated the strengths and weaknesses of various methods which are sometimes dependent upon constrains specific to a particular study. With the well-prepared protocols, it is possible to carry out the population census to produce a reliable outcome with great precision. 