<heading>Introduction</heading>English Nature is the government agency whose principal objective is to promote nature conservation in the countryside in order to ensure that future generations can appreciate the joy of natural beauty. English Nature is engaged in policy implementation, decision making on conservation activities in England, the corresponding bodies for Wales and Scotland are the Countryside Council for Wales and Scottish Natural Heritage respectively. Those three agencies work together with the Joint Nature Conservation Committee, an advisory body, on nation-wide matters (EN 2006①). Following the enactment of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, so called Haskin's report, English Nature has been integrated with Landscape, Access and Recreation division of the Countryside Agency and environmental parts of the Rural Development Service to form Natural England since October 2006. Reformation is expected to lead on to more robust enforcement of conservation activities with an emphasis on the promotion of public access and recreational service in the countryside (EN 2006③). This report will cover the following topics on English Nature and the Joint Nature Conservation Committee; origin and brief history, policy objectives, funding sources and expenditure, organisational structure, functions and case studies, and discuss how Rural Environmental Scientist can be involved in the activities of English Nature. <heading>Part 1: English Nature</heading><heading>Origin and brief history</heading>Formation of conservation targeted government body was motivated by the increasing public recognition on the importance of countryside for recreation in the 1940s, resulting in the establishment of Nature Conservancy by National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949. By the Nature Conservancy Council Act 1973, Nature Conservancy was replaced with Nature Conservancy Council with four main aims of (EN 1992); <list>To designate and manage nature reserves and conservation areasTo identify the Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)To commit and undertake scientific research on wildlife and conservationTo provide scientific advice to government on policies</list>Further reformation was taken place in 1992 by Environmental Protection Act 1990 which appointed English Nature, the Countryside Council for Wales, Scottish Natural Heritage to work on regional level and the Joint Nature Conservation Committee as a coordinating body on national and international issues. English Nature, an agency for England, was launched on 9 th April 1991 with an aim to promote conservation of England's wildlife and natural features for future generations (EN 1992). As a result of integration with the Countryside Agency and the Rural Development Service in October 2006, newly established Natural England will extend its power over various aspects of countryside conservation including the designation of SSSIs, National Parks, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and implementation of regulations on management of those sites, particularly in order to improve the public access and to promote rural development, as well as provision of grants, advice and information to the government and non-governmental bodies (EN 2006①). <heading>Policy objectives</heading>In the work plan for 1991/92, the first report published by English Nature, the following policy objectives were stated(EN 1992); <list>To ensure that the best sites of wildlife, geological landforms and marine habitats are safeguarded.To bring about sympathetic management for nature conservation in all habitats; and that the natural environment-whether air, water or land- is healthy and capable of supporting wildlife.To ensure that the important and less common species of wild plants and animals are conserved and that their numbers and distribution are increased. To provide opportunities for people to appreciate their natural heritage.To carry out research and survey which support the above.</list>Those criteria have been the foundation of the development of successive policy objectives and the scope of activities to be practiced. The current framework puts an emphasis on the operation of activities to reflect best environmental practices and to implement an environmental management system in order to achieve sustainability and prevention of pollution. Six principal roles are defined to guide its action (EN 2003, EN 2006①, EN 2006②). <list>comply with all applicable legal and other requirementsidentify environmental aspects and prioritise action to reduce them;set challenging targets to reduce our environmental impacts and regularly review progress;raise awareness of the environment amongst our employees through training, our environmental co-ordinators network and communication of environmental performance;report annually on our progress and performance, making this available both within the Office and externally;undertake regular management reviews to ensure that our environmental management system remains effective.</list><heading>Funding sources and expenditure</heading>English Nature is mainly funded by Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) as grant-in-aid. Additional incomes are obtained from various activities such as from sales of publications, through national lottery grants, contribution from conservation partners, and from incomes of National Natural Reserves. Expenditure is mainly allocated to staff costs, conservation projects, management and operating costs, grant offers and maintenance of National Nature Reserves (Fig. 1 & Fig. 2) (EN 2006②④). <figure/><figure/><table/><table/><heading>Organisational structure</heading>There are four division within English Nature; people and policies, designated sites, modernising and managing English Nature projects and communication, science and wider environment (Fig. 3). Allocation and roles of four divisions clearly demonstrate the reflection of the main objectives of English Nature to organizational structure and the emphasis on its activities (EN 2004).Executive committee is comprised of directors of each division. Seven general managers and directors for particular areas of work take responsibility on implementation and reporting of regional plans and projects which are assigned to nine regional directors and twenty two operational area teams. There are over 950 permanent staff employed by English Nature at 31 st December 2004 (EN 2006①). <figure/><heading>Functions</heading>The functions of English Nature are summarised in the following six aspects (EN 2003, EN 2006①); <heading>Position statement</heading>One of the main concerns of English Nature is to influence the policies of government and non-government bodies associated with conservation work. English Nature stands on major issues and provides position statement as its opinion and advice to lead the modification on policy framework. The recent position statements include the following issues; avian influenza, environmentally sustainable transport and forestry, access and countryside recreation, renewable energy, and climate change. In order to identify the targets and priority actions, sector analysis; an overview of various influences on nature conservation, particularly by businesses and industry is undertaken. Many business sectors, companies own land of conservation interests or are closely related with agriculture, sea, transport and water management. Hence, English Nature claims the importance of the integration of business with nature conservation. Through position statement and sector analysis, English Nature seeks to guide businesses for conservation-incorporated framework and to increase the awareness on the responsibilities for management. <heading>Management and designation of special sites</heading>English Nature takes responsibilities on the identification of special sites for conservation, management and monitoring of such areas. Designation is classified according to the significance of areas in terms of conservation values; Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs); represent the best sites for wildlife and geology, over 50 % of which is recognised as internationally important. By 31 st March 2006, the total area of England's SSSIs is 1,074,215 hectares which covers 7.5 % of land area in England. English Nature stated the target for SSSIs as to improve 95 % of SSSIs land by area to favourable condition by 2010. Although this target has been a challenge, there has been a significant effort to achieve this target over the past years and it is expected to practice further actions in the next few years (EN 200６②). Special Areas of Conservation (SACs); designation under the European Union's Habitats Directive for the protection of wildlife. National Nature Reserves; areas of national importance for wildlife habitat and geological formations. There are 218 designated sites in England which cover 89,809 hectares. The annual report 2005/06 summarised the analysis on visitors view that there is an increasing demand for better quality comfort and guidance in access and leisure facilities in National Nature Reserves and that the next stage is to address and reflect the revealed issues in the operation of new Natural England (EN 2006②). Local Nature Reserves; areas for both people and wildlife, with local importance. Those sites are expected to provide opportunities for people to enjoy and study wildlife. There are 1287 sites in total across England which are used for variety of community projects such as for school visits and for education purposes (EN 2006②). Greenspaces; the aim of those areas is provision of contact with nature in towns (EN 2006②. <heading>Grant offers</heading>There are many national grants provided mainly to voluntary organisations. It is expected that there would be reformation of those grants by Natural England in the near future. Some examples of existing or past grants are; Reserave Enhancement Scheme, Countdown 2010 Biodiversity Action Fund, Land Purchase Grants, Local Biodiversity Grants, Volunteer Action Grants (EN 2006①). <heading>People and Policies; public involvement</heading>English Nature acknowledges the importance of volunteers to carry out effective conservation activities. There are 1865 volunteers under National Volunteer Project by English Nature, contribution of volunteers is estimated as to be equivalent to 7500 days of support (EN 2006②). There has been an increase in the number of volunteers involved particularly in recent years (EN 2006). Main roles undertaken by volunteers are habitat management of National Nature Reserves, administrative assistance, bird ringing, invertebrate and botanical surveying, livestock monitoring, or organising educational visits and walks as leaders. <heading>Management of English Nature</heading>English Nature also leads sustainable lifestyle as an organisation through, for instance, the promotion of the use of alternatively fuelled vehicles, recycling initiatives at headquarters, reducing water consumption (EN 2006②). <heading>Science and Research</heading>Various research projects have been undertaken and led by English Nature in order to improve the understanding of natural habitat and to utilise the acquired knowledge on the practice of conservation activities. English Nature leads Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) and provides information on the achievement and monitoring results. Some success stories reported in the annual report 2005/06 are; re-introduction of pool frogs which became extinct in the U.K in the 1990s, steady recovery of the Cornish path moss population reaching the highest level since the start of monitoring, and progress on the accumulation of information for maritime BAP habitats (EN 2006②, EN 2003). <heading>Case study at regional scale: return on Red Kites in the Chilterns, and throughout England</heading>Red Kite, Milluvus milluvus, is the largest prey of bird once commonly found in the U.K. Red Kites feed on animal carcasses which led to a misbelief that the birds become a threat to livestock such as lambs and gamebirds. Hence, the birds were persecuted to extinct, in most cases, by being poisoned (RSPB 2006). By the end of the 19 th century, there were less than a dozen found only in central Wales. In 1989, English Nature and RSPB set up a re-introduction project in two sites, one in the Chilterns and the other in Inverness in Northern Scotland (EN 2002). The habitat requirement for this bird is a combined vegetation of deciduous woodlands where it nests, and grasslands or farmlands where it scavenges food such as carrion, invertebrate, and small mammals including rats and chicks. The selection of those two sites was since the areas were under designation as conservation sites and the areas supported large and rich habitats providing an ideal condition for the first attempt for reintroduction. A total of 93 nestlings from Spanish population were released in the initial five years. In the early springs each year, twnety nestlings were brought into the sites when four to six weeks in age. Initially, chicks were kept in wooden cages for six to eight weeks and were released into the wild in the early summer (EN 2002, the Chilterns Conservation Board 2006). By 2001, the population has grown to be well established in both cites with over 120 pairs in the Chilterns and 32 pairs in Northern Scotland. Following the first success, further reintroduction has begun in the following four cites since 1999; Central and Southern Scotland, the Midlands and Yorkshire. Red Kites in the Chilterns started breeding in 1992 and from 1999, the chicks from there became to be released into other cites. The recent reintroduction has been taken place in Newcastle since 2004 with kites from the Chilterns (EN 2006③). The reintroduction of Red Kites has been a significant success, now this bird of prey has become a symbol of rebirth. English Nature with the support of many organisations, has taken the lead for this programme (EN 2002, the Chilterns Conservation Board 2006). <heading>Part 2: the Joint Nature Conservation Committee</heading><heading>Policy objectives</heading>The Joint Nature Conservation Committee was established in 1990 in conjunction with the division of Nature Conservancy Council to three regional agencies; English Nature, the Countryside Council for Wales and Scottish Natural Heritage, with its main function to serve as an advisory group on national and international issues associated with nature conservation. Its main policy objectives are (JNCC 2006①②); <list>advise Government on the development and implementation of policies for, or affecting, nature conservation in the UK and internationally; provide advice and disseminate knowledge on nature conservation issues affecting the UK and internationally; establish common standards throughout the UK for nature conservation, including monitoring, research, and the analysis of results; commission or support research which deems relevant to these functions. </list><heading>Orginisational structure and Funding Sources</heading>The committee is comprised of 14 members of a Chairman and five independent members appointed by the Secretary of State; the Chairman of Council for Nature Conservation and the Countryside; the Chairmen or deputy Chairmen of the Countryside Council for Wales, English Nature, and Scottish Natural Heritage; and one other member from each of these four bodies. Meetings are held four times a year and the papers and mitues are published (JNCC 2006①②). The committee is mainly funded by three regional agencies of English Nature, the Countryside Council for Wales and Scottish Natural Heritage and European Union funds (Fig. 4 )(JNCC 2006②). <table/><figure/><heading>Functions </heading>The committee is responsible for the production of statutory provisions, particularly on the matters concerned with Sites of Special Scientific Interests in order to publish and revise the guidance for management. Monitoring of the conditions of designated sites is also an important duty for the Joint Nature Conservation Committee. A recent outcome of such activity is Report on Common Standard Monitoring which assessed the status of species, habitats and geology of over 6000 of the U.K protected areas based on the results from 13,000 assessments conducted in the past six years (JNCC 2006①②). The purpose of the production of the report and the development of Common standar Monitoring was to provide agency members with the comprehensive, quick and reliable methods to evaluate the status of designated sites and the conditions of features of conservation interests. This report also enables to identify the priority issues at local and national level which is passed down to regional agencies who take responsibility for planning and impelementation of practical actions (JNCC 2006①). <heading>Part 3: </heading><heading>The role of Rural Environmental Scientists</heading>There are various opportunities for Rural Environmental Scientists to be engaged in the activities of English Nature. For instance, cordination of sccientific research projects, development of conservation programmes, involvement in monitoring of designated sites, and provision of advice. The opportunities are not limited for professional possessions, involvement as volunteers may also be attractive for those who would be enthusiastic on promoting the conservation activities among the general public. On the other hand, the provision of feedback to English Nature as an individual scientist with professional knowledge is also an important aspect to improve the effectiveness of English Nature as a lead of conservation practitioner. The fundamental role of rural environmental sicentists would be to actively engage in activities in, or to English Nature in order to support its objective to promote the conservation of wildlife for future generations, to improve the knowelde on natural environment and to raise the public awareness. <heading>The provision of future; targets of Natural England </heading>Natural England set four priorities for the first three years of its operation; <list>A healthy environment; improve the protection and management of important designated areas.Enjoyment; encourage outdoor activities to the public and to raise the awareness.Sustainability; ensure to keep balance the need for development and the use of natural resources with the need to preserve the environment.Future; take responsibility to promote that government, businesses, individuals take account of the impacts of their decision-making has on nature and to provide reliable evidence to support the issue. </list>It could be argued that the focus of Natural England would shift towards management of the countryside in cohesive way which tries to achieve rural development as well as conservation. The consequence of establishment of Natural England would be dependent upon the effectiveness of its leadership; the ability to guide the interests of people from different aspects to set, activate and achieve the targets. <heading>Conclusion</heading>This report reviewed the role of English Nature as a government agency concerning nature conservation. The functions of English Nature are diverse, while there are many challenges to achieve its targets particularly on the status of the designated areas and the action implementation of Biodiversity Action Plans, a lot of efforts has been put into effective coordination of works. There are success stories as demonstrated with an example of the reintroduction of Red Kites. It is expected that the creation of Natural England would induce a significant positive impact on conservation activities and rural development in the future. 