<heading>Introduction: the Origin</heading>The Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management (IEEM) is a company limited by Guarantee: No. 263 9067. The institute is a membership based organisaiton comprised of over 2300 professionals working in various sectors in ecology and environmental management. It was established in 1991 as a result of the deliberation of a working group formed by the British Ecological Society, The British Association of Nature Conservationists, the Institute of Biology and Royal Geographical Society (BES&IEEM, 2001). The principle aims of the Institute are 'to raise the profile of the professions, to establish and improve the professional standards, and to promote an ethic of environmental care within the possession (IEEM a, 2006, Intute: Science, Engineering and Technology, 2006)'. This report will firstly outline the following topics; structure, membership, policy objectives, function of the Institute, secondly demonstrate the recent achievement of its work with an example of the production of guideline for Ecological Impact Assessment, and thirdly discuss the role of Rural Environmental Scientists in the Institute. <heading>Structure</heading>The Council serves as the decision making body and activities of the Institute is coordinated by five committees and five geographical sections (IEEM a, 2006). <heading>Committees</heading><list>Finance and General Purposes (F&GP): deals with the administration of the Institute, e.g. budget planning, preparation of annual reports and annual meetings, property maintenance.Training, Education and Career Development Committee (TECDC): organises training opportunities in order to help raise the academic qualification of those who wish to apply for a membership in IEEM as well as of the existing members.Professional Affairs Committee (PAC): reviews the Code of Professional Conduct, issues guidelines on professional practice, and disseminate the information of new development in the practice of the related scientific area among members.Membership Admissions Committee (MAC): works on application for membership and renewal, on preparation of the Membership Directory.External Affairs Committee (EAC): responds to statutory and policy consultation of the government and industry through cooperation with other organisations such as the Society for the Environment (SocEnv), The European Federation of Associations of Environmental Professionals (EFAEP), and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN). The committee also coordinate members' views in response to consultation on ecological and environmental and sustainable development issues.</list><heading>Geographical Sections</heading>There are five sections: The Scottish Section, The North East Section, The shadow North West section, The Shadow Irish Section, and The Shadow South West Section, working at regional level. The Geographical Sections organise local and national conferences, and events. Most of the regional sections have been launched recently, it is expected that there would be an expansion of regional activities in the future. The institute itself is a member of The Society for the Environment (SocEnv), The European Federation of Associations of Environmental Professionals (EFAEP), and the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN) (IEEM a, 2006). <heading>Funding</heading>In terms of the funding, due to the restriction on the provision of information available to the public by the Institute, there was no evidence of funding sources supporting the operation of the Institute. Since the Institute is a company which needs to gain earning from its services, it is estimated that the Institute is likely to obtain income from the sales of publication and consultation fees as well as membership fees. <heading>Membership</heading>There are over 2300 members drawn from individuals engaged in a broad spectrum of work in ecology and environmental management in the public, voluntary and industrial sectors (Fig 1). Depending on the level of qualified profession, memberships are categorised into five classes: Full, Associate, Graduate, Affiliate, and Students. Full memberships cost £120 (£80 outside the U.K) annually and applicants must fulfill the criteria which are based on the combination of the level of academic qualification and the number of years engaged in relevant post qualification professional experiences within the last ten years for full memberships or six years for associates. For example, PhD holders need to have at least two years of practical experiences, honours degree holders in a relevant subject are required to have a minimum of four years experiences as an ecologist or an environmental manager in order to obtain eligibility to apply for full memberships (IEEM a, 2006). <figure/><heading>Policy objectives</heading>The following five policy objectives are stated by the Institute (IEEM a, 2006): <list>To advance the science and practice of ecology and environmental management for the public benefit in the United Kingdom and Internationally, To further the conservation and enhancement of biodiversity and maintenance of ecological processes and life support systems essential to a fully functional biosphere,To further environmentally sustainable management and development,To promote and encourage education, training, study and research in the science and practice of ecology, environmental management and sustainable development,To establish, uphold and advance the standards of education, qualification, competence and conduct of those who practise ecology and environmental management as a profession and for the benefit of the public.</list><heading>Functions</heading>The services provided by the Institute are divided into four areas: Training workshops, Conferences, Publications, Provision of opinion for ecology ad environmental management through consultation (IEEM a, 2006). Training workshops: Workshops are not intended to provide training courses but to serve as informal opportunities for people to exchange experiences on works in ecology and environmental management. The programmes are taught by a member of IEEM, as often as twice a week in different locations within the U.K, usually run for one day with 15 to 25 participants and places are open to non-members as well. Conferences: The Institute organises conferences on particular issue such as climate change, Ecological Impact Assessment, or on regional issues. Conferences are open to members and non-members. The presentations are uploaded on the Institute's website and the proceedings are published to disseminate information on the outcomes. Publication: Publication is one of the main services offered by the Institute. 'In Practice' is a quarterly journal produced by the Institute, and provides information on meetings, events, technical papers and public news. Although the contribution on any aspect of relating issues are accepted, the aim of the journal is not to publish scientific papers on research but only to ensure that members are well informed of up-to-date news. Some publication is only available to members such as The Professional Issues Series (PIS) which is a collection of guidance documents on practical works relating to the professions. In addition to the production of guidelines or conference proceedings to support and enhance professional standards, the institute promotes to increase the students' interest on ecology and environmental management. The recent outcome of such objective is the career guidance to students at school or university 'Rooting for a Career in Ecology and Environmental Management?' published in collaboration with the British Ecological Society (BES&IEEM, 2001). <heading>Achievement: 'Ecological Impact Assessment Guidelines for the United Kingdom'. </heading>The Institute plays an important role in the provision of guidelines which provide practical advice for professional in order to conduct assessments or survey in relation to ecology and environmental management. 'Ecological Impact Assessment Guidelines for the United Kingdom (Fig 2)' is a recommended procedure for the ecological component of Environmental Impact Assessment which has been made available for free of charge as a downloadable PDF in the website in July 2006 (IEEM b, 2006). The Guidelines have been formulated by some members of the Institute and leading EIA professionals in the U.K. The significance of this piece of work is that there has been a very broad scale consultation with various organisations in the development of the Guidelines, including U.K Government Departments, U.K country conservation and environment agencies, the Heritage Service and National Parks and Wildlife Service and the Environment Agency in Irelandand, and many non-Government Organisations (CIB, 2006). Hence, the Guidelines are being promoted as 'best practice' in the UK Government's Circular - Planning for Biodiversity and Geological Conservation: a Guide to Good Practice (CIB, 2006, IEEM b, 2006). It is expected that the Guidelines will provide practical methodology and procedures for practitioners to carry out the evaluation of ecological features not only as a component of an assessment prior to development but also as an evidence to support appraisals on environmental issues (IEEM b, 2006). The provision of the standard protocols will improve the quality of data collected in ecological analysis by different examiners which will be used for comparison and incorporation of information over wider scale, contributing to the advances in the practical use of ecological assessment in real world situation. Therefore, it is expected that the Institute would take a lead for such an improvement in the quality of assessments in relevant subject areas. <list> Scoping define the scope of an EcIA via consultation with interested groups, authorities (in practice scoping is iterative throughout the EcIA process) Identification of zones of influence identify all likely influences arisen from the whole lifespan of the project Evaluation of ecological resources and features identify and evaluate ecological features with potential to be affected by the project Identitification of biological and physicalchanges which are likely to affect valued ecological resources and features Assessment of significant impacts identify whether and which of the biophysical changes are likely cause a significant ecological impact, which is defined as an impact on the integrity of a defined site or ecosystem and/or the conservation status of habitats or species within a given geographical area, including cumulative impacts Impact mitigation refine the project to incorporate 1. ecological enhancement measures, 2. mitigation measures, 3. compensation measures Assessment of the ecological impacts of the refined project Provision of advice on the consequences for decision making of the significant ecological impacts, based on the value of the affected resource or feature Following monitoring includes the implementation of mitigation measures and provide feedback on ecological outcomes. Fig. 2: Brief summary on the procedure of Ecological Impact Assessment (EcIA) (IEEM b, 2006)</list><heading>Role of Rural Environmental Scientists</heading>Due to the nature of a company, it seems that there are limited opportunities for Rural Environmental Scientists in involving the works of the Institute without applying for a membership in the first instance. Most of conferences and workshops are open to the public, so active participation in those opportunities either as a member or even as a non-member would be an important approach to be engaged in or to improve the works of the Institute. Information offered by the Institute seemed to assign the restriction over the use of some of its resources such as details of the insights of publications and outcomes from its services in particular, which should be provided open to people in order to further the public understanding on relevant areas in ecology and environmental management. Although the primary target of the Institute is professionals, it would be expected that the expansion of its scope of activity down to the public as well as professionals would lead to the enhancement of the contribution of the Institute to the society in the future. <heading>Conclusion</heading>Institute of Ecology and Environmental Management is relatively newly established company comprised of professionals in the relevant area in ecology and environmental management. The institute is very active in promoting the personal development of professionalism which will lead to the advance of understanding and to the enhancement of debate over matters on ecology and environmental management. Publication and coordination of events such as workshops and conferences are its key services. Furthermore, as achieved in the provision of student career advisory book and The Guidelines of Ecological Impact Assessment as an open access information, it is anticipated that the expansion of work by the Institute will contribute to improve the quality of activities carried out by practitioners in ecology and environmental management and the attitude towards such matters by the general public. 