<heading>Introduction: </heading>The Bohr model was developed as an improvement of the Rutherford model of the atom and first presented in 1913. It was the first structural model of the atom to incorporate quantum mechanics and link quantum and classical mechanics. The Bohr model of the atom was a huge success at the time and still today is taught and used in schools, university and beyond. However, at the time was known to be flawed in many ways as there were observations it was unable to account for. This essay will asses the reasons behind the success of this model and how this is related to its flaws. (6). <heading>Rutherford Model: </heading><figure/>Rutherford developed his model after conducting his famous gold foil experiment and was able to conclude that the atom consisted of a positively charged nucleus (formed from positively charged protons stabilised by uncharged neutrons) with relatively large mass surrounded by negatively charged electrons of tiny mass moving randomly in space rather like the planets in our solar system. However this model does not work. Newton's 1 st law tells that if an object is not in a state of rest or uniform motion a force must be acting on the mass of the object, Newton's 2 nd law tells us that where a force is acting on a mass there must be some kind of acceleration. In circular motion the forces are unbalanced as the body is travelling a curved path and it is therefore accelerating. An electron moving in a direction x creates by convention a current in the - x direction. As a current always induces a magnetic field a moving electron with changing direction will cause a changing magnetic field. Consequently due to the magnetic field the electron would lose energy, its angular momentum would decrease and it would spiral in and be captured by the nucleus. (5) The atom however does not collapse. Bohr explained this by developing the Rutherford model, placing the electrons in specific orbits around a central nucleus. 'Bohr said 'the atom had "privileged" orbits such that the electron was "safe" within them meaning would not fall into nucleus and therefore the atom is stable. However he did not say why there should be such orbits' (4).The electrons are held in their orbits by an electrostatic attraction between themselves and the positively charged nucleus. The electrons in the orbits closest to the nucleus are held in tight while those further from the nucleus are subject to a lesser attractive force. This is due to the increased distance between the nucleus and the electrons and the shielding of the force due to the inner electrons. Therefore it is easier (takes less energy) to remove an electron from an outer orbit than from an inner one. <figure/><heading>Particle-wave duality: </heading>Before progressing further it is necessary to pause and consider the particle/wave duality theory, Bohr's model considers electrons as particles which is not the whole story. Young's famous double slit experiment proved in the early 1800's that light propagates as a wave. He did this by passing a beam of light through a pair of slits in a barrier and observing the diffraction pattern produced due to constructive and destructive interference. However, in 1905 Einstein used the photoelectric effect to show that light has a particle like character. If electromagnetic radiation falls on a metal surface electrons may be emitted. Electrons will only be emitted if the frequency of the radiation exceeds a certain minimum level. However, the amount of electrons emitted depends on the intensity of the light and not on the frequency. The kinetic energy of the emitted electrons is directly proportional to the frequency of the light not the intensity. Einstein explained this behaviour by saying that an electron is emitted when it absorbs a photon. A photon has the energy E = h×f ( f =frequency, h = Plank's constant), this energy must be above a minimum W , to release the electron and any excess energy goes to the kinetic energy of the electron. (1) Consequently light can behave as a particle and a wave. <figure/><figure/>Bohr also combined in his theory the spectroscopic observations of atoms. Scientists had noticed that an atom of an element only absorbs or emits certain energies, certain colours of light. This information allowed Bohr to assume that the energy of a bound electron is quantised at a different amount for each orbit. This was backed by the photoelectric effect and gave rise to the knowledge of the region of light. The formula below is used to determine the energy of the photon emitted (+) or absorbed (-) from the initial and final energy sates of the electron, provided you know the frequency of the photon. (9)  FORMULA  (where h = Plank's constant) This explained the stability of atoms. <figure/>Bohr developed quantum numbers to describe the electrons in the atom, he showed that the angular momentum of the electron is quantised in amounts of h/2π . An electron with mass m at velocity v travelling in a circular orbit radius r has a angular momentum of mvr. mvr = nh/2π where n = 1, 2, 3...etc. n is the principal quantum number and relates to the energy of the orbital , 1 being the closest to the nucleus and having the highest energy. These orbits are also given names, k, l, m, n ....etc.. corresponding to n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ....etc.. However the quantum numbers in the Bohr model where assigned to suit observations and had no underlying basis in theory. (2) Below is a diagram which represents the electron transitions between orbits that give rise to the emission spectrum obtained by three scientists Lyman, Balmer and Paschen. The Balmer spectrum is formed in the visible region of light and was the mathematical relationship on which Bohr based his theory, the Lyman and Paschen were only discovered later. It must be noted that this diagram is the same for electron promotion which forms the absorption spectrum only in the opposite direction. This model and the Bohr equations worked very well and allowed him to explain and predict further wavelengths of other spectral lines for the Paschen (infrared) and Lyman (ultraviolet) series. However this model was flawed as it also predicted spectral lines that where not observed. (2) <figure/>Bohr's explanation of the electron cloud made chemistry into the science it is today. The similarities of some elements despite differing atomic weights was already known. However Bohr's theory categorised the elements into the periodic table and provided an explanation for these properties. Initially he explained the orbits fill from the centre beginning with and moving outward when each successive orbit is filled. The first one n = 1, contains 2 electrons the second n = 2 contains 8 and n = 3 houses 18 electrons. The periodic table developed had several spaces for which there were no elements, Bohr used these spaces to predict the properties of these unknown elements and the discovery of hafnium several years later strengthened his theory. Chemistry is mainly concerned with how molecules are formed from atoms. There are two main types of bonding, covalent (electron sharing) and ionic (electron swapping). In each case the atoms seek to lose or gain electrons to attain a full outer shell/orbit and so to in crease its stability. (8) Chlorine is an example of covalent bonding one should note that in this diagram the n = 1 orbit is not drawn. <figure/>Sodium chloride is an example of ionic bonding, the bond is formed due to the attraction of the opposite charges. <figure/>Orbital theory is a complicated one and not as clear cut as Bohr supposed. His model was unable to explain the broadening out of the spectral lines. If as Bohr explained only specific frequencies corresponding to the specific energy levels are absorbed a clear line should be observed. However if the absorption spectrum of an atom is analysed the absorption lines are like those depicted in a) and not as often not as clear cut as expected. <figure/>This was only later explained as being due to the state, induced by the temperature of the atom. If at a high temperature the electrons would already be excited and therefore not in the ground state, consequently it would absorb in the Balmer series not the Lyman. additionally the Doppler effect causes some of the broadening. Generally electrons at high speeds relatively close to the speed of light, if they are moving away from the observer when they emit photons the frequency observed will be red shifted and if they are moving toward then the observed frequency will be blue shifted. (5) <heading>Spin: </heading>Electrons are negatively charged, and like charges repel. If (as in the Bohr atom) you place many electrons next to each other in a orbit they are bound to repel each other, consequently additional quantum numbers are needed to describe the electrons. If we consider the electron as particle and in addition to moving it is spinning on its axis, a spin which is entirely independent of its circular motion. There are two different states of spin with equal energy labelled 'up' and 'down', corresponding to the vector direction of spin. Two electrons with opposite spin are allowed to exist in the same orbit as this counteracts the repulsive forces that would otherwise push them apart and causes what we call electron pairs. The Bohr model of the atom was succeeded by Somerfield's model, however Somerfield had to spend ages refining and tweaking the model trying to account for the discrepancies and make fit observations. For example the development of the orbits. Orbits appear to be different shapes elliptical or circular and become so due to the effects of magnetic fields. 'These different states allowed more possibilities for different spectral lines to appear and brought the model of the atom into closer agreement with experimental data.'(7) His theory however was superseded by Schrödinger's model which provided a more accurate picture of the atom. <heading>Conclusion: </heading>The purpose of a model is to provide something that is easily imaginable, easy to manipulate and therefore useful in practical situations or applications. It must relate to something we already know create a simile of something we already understand to aid learning. The Bohr model relates to the solar system and it is logical to assume that what is large is similar to what is small. The Bohr model of the atom brought quantum and classical physics together. Classical physics is an approximation however, it is necessary to unambiguous communication as we are bounded by our experience as macro-level perceivers and quantum mechanics is not easily perceived on the macroscopic scale. Henri Bergson said, "our logic is the logic of solid bodies and is derived as a result of our experience on macro level." This is explained by the direct cause and effect mechanism perceived in the macroscopic world however, this relationship is disguised in the quantum universe as there is no one to one correspondence between physical theory and physical reality.(3) The Bohr model solved many problems in physics at that time for example it explained the stability of atoms by giving reasons as to why the electron stays in its orbit and does not collapse into nucleus radiating energy(3). The Bohr model is very useful in describing electronic configuration in chemistry and even predicted unknown elements. It proved Einstein's theory of quantised light as the difference in the energy of the orbits is finite and electron transfer from orbit to orbit is achieved via the absorption of a specific frequency of light comparable to the energy of a photon. Additionally it explained the hydrogen absorption spectrum. However the Bohr model of the atom is flawed, the equations were not applicable to any element greater than hydrogen, this is due to the fact that electrons interact with each other making the situation more complicated. The model even fell down when trying to explain hydrogen as it predicted more spectral lines than have been observed. The quantum numbers were assigned to fit observation and yet Bohr did not develop any underlying theory as support. Additionally the model needed many adjustments to make it work as demonstrated by Somerfield's attempts to change the Bohr model to fit each new observation. These flaws created many holes in the theory which allowed people to think in new directions about the nature of the universe especially in the quantum mechanical field. Had the Bohr atom been further developed it would have lost its simplicity, and it is also its simplicity that has ensured its success in making it an ideal tool in the teaching of the atom as it provides a firm, easily imaginable base that can be developed later into a more complex picture. To ask a child to imagine a theoretical, mathematical probability model of the atom is clearly too much. In conclusion the Bohr model of the atom has been a success due to its flaws. Through out the writing off this essay the impression gained from the media studied has been one that focuses largely on the negative aspects, the flaws within the Bohr model of the atom, consequently this essay is concluded with a quote from the man himself for had he not developed his model we would not have advanced to our present day understanding of science. <quote>"Every word I utter is to be understood not as an affirmation but as a question." -Neils Bohr"</quote>