Sheepdrove is an organic farm in Berkshire, which comprises of a traditional mixed farm of 2300 acres, with1700 sheep, 180 suckler beef cows, 80 sows, around 20,000 poultry, mixed cereals and also composting and turkeys at Christmas. Organic farming is an approach to agriculture aiming to create integrated, humane, and environmentally friendly, as well as economically sustainable production systems. Currently organic sales are growing by two million pounds per week, twice the rate of the total food market (Soil Association 2004). This has meant that organic food sales have increased 10% in the last year with sales now at 1.12 billion. This information shows that Sheepdrove is in a thriving market. At present Sheepdrove sell their produce direct to consumers through their home delivery, and website. They also sell some chickens through a Waitrose contract. The remaining produce gets sold to local butchers and a shop in Bristol. Selling direct to customers has built them a good reputation and allows them to achieve the highest profits, rather then selling through a retailer. Organic farming has shown to be a highly consumer driven system, with specialised buyers who are looking for specific qualities and issues such as: - Peace of mind- There is currently no proof that organic produce is better or healthier than mass produced produce but people feel because it is higher priced and the media coverage it has had it is better for you therefore making them more content. Perceived social status and quality- People feel that as the produce is more expensive and natural it is of higher quality. Because of the price not everyone can afford to buy organic therefore those that do feel they have a perceived social status. Environmentally friendly produce- Scientific evidence has shown that organic farming is better for the environment. People feel very strongly about protecting the environment and therefore prefer to buy organic. Animal welfare- Organic farming practices have higher animal welfare, this is a selling point of organic meat, which Sheepdrove emphasise greatly. Sheepdrove addresses all of these qualities people are looking for and uses them as selling points for their produce. One of the main aspects of their business is poultry production. Most poultry is sold through the business but they also have a contract with Waitrose to supply 30% of their production a week. The way in which their organic method of production compared to conventional is with the origin of the animals, the feed, disease prevention and housing. <heading>Poultry</heading><heading>Origin</heading>The chicks are on a pre-order system and come to Sheepdrove as day olds weighing around 50g. They come from a hatchery that solely produces organic chicks. In conventional methods chicks come to the farm also as day olds from commercial hatcheries that are not organic and hatch millions of chicks for broiler and egg laying. This means that there is a higher chance of disease. The origin of the chick is very important, Sheepdrove need to keep the breeder constant to ensure a constant quality chick and know exactly that the chicks are 100% organic, hatched from organic eggs. Without this assurance they would not be able to sell the chickens as organic to the consumers. They can also guarantee to the consumers that the chicks have been hatched in the highest quality conditions. <heading>Feed</heading>The organic chicks at Sheepdrove are currently fed 80% organic ration, which is changing to 100% organic. Therefore the ingredients have originated from an organic source, organic wheat, barley and oats. Conventional chicks would eat a range of feeds, those that are high in protein and fat, often the cheapest and some that contains growth stimulants and highly manufactured ingredients containing chemicals. Sheepdrove poultry eat organic feed producing organic meat. They grow at their own natural rate compared to conventional feeds. This is a positive selling point for Sheepdrove, consumers prefer naturally grown chicken and they can promote that they taste better for maturing more slowly. <heading>Disease prevention</heading>Conventional methods of poultry production would be to vaccinate the birds from a range of diseases to keep diseases at bay before they occur, any sign of disease birds are all given antibiotics. At sheep drove the chicks are only vaccinated against two diseases coccidiosis and gumberer. Apart from these two vaccinations they believe in disease prevention. Through moving and disinfecting the houses with every batch and do not allow chickens in contact with turkeys. They also have herb strips in the fields to allow self-medication. This means they have very little problems with disease, however in the case of disease they cull odd chickens or give antibiotics but do not allow them to be culled for 42 days. This could cause a slaughtering and supply problem if the whole flock was affected. These methods of disease prevention on the poultry at Sheepdrove create the best animal welfare conditions, and meat to be sold as organic. <heading>Housing </heading>The housing is one of the main aspects of poultry production at Sheepdrove in order to ensure that the chickens have an enriched environment from arrival to slaughter. The chicks are kept in well-adapted housing for the first three weeks. Here they have perches, a veranda to get use to light and movement, also have a CD player to get them use to outside sounds reducing stress in the future when they go outside. They also have natural dawn and dusk lighting, with temperature high then gradually adjusted until it is similar to the outside. All of these adjustments improve the animals welfare and create an enriched environment as well as a smooth move from inside to the outdoor sheds. The Soil Association dictates the stocking density, 1000 chicks per shed. Conventional broiler chickens are raised in confinement, with light 24hours a day allowing continual feeding and growth. The houses do not contain nests or roosts and are kept at an optimum temperature. The critical temperature for chicks is 34 oC, below this temperature the chicks use energy to maintain their body heat. In intense systems the temperature is kept at this temperature therefore all the energy can go into meat production for the chicken. In the organic system because the chickens can roam and are outside they grow at a slower rate. The housing for organic production plays an important part in ensuring the chickens have the highest animal welfare as well as friendly to the environment therefore creating a piece of mind for customers. Sheepdrove has shown that it addresses all the expectations of what consumers want from organic food. They ensure their chickens are housed to the highest quality, with an enriched environment therefore high standard of animal welfare. They produce slow maturing and totally organic chickens with appropriate use of disease prevention while being environmentally friendly. This gives the consumers peace of mind and produces high quality meat which they market very efficiently. They sell direct to consumers to achieve the highest economical advantage possible. Their policies and production techniques as an organic farmer have shown to be very different to conventional production systems. 