<heading>I. Introduction:</heading>The game Rachet and Clank is based on inter-planetary exploration. The object of the game is to collect as many gadget and weapons (which I will, from now onwards, collectively refer to as object) for their inventory. There are 11 objects in total to collect with their PseudoCode identifier (see appendix 1). During play items can be picked up or dropped. If an item is picked up it is checked against the current inventory and if it already had been collected a message is flagged to the user saying so. If the user wishes to drop an object they can check their inventory for a list of their objects and select one to drop. If the object they wish to drop is not in their inventory a message is flagged asking the user to verify their selection. If not the object is dropped. <heading>The Algorithm:</heading><heading>2. a Informal sequence of steps :</heading>The user begins play, they have no objects in their inventory. The user navigates the environment for object. When the user navigates over an object they can pick up the object. If the user decides to pick up the object, it is added to their inventory. Therefore I=I=1 When playing a user can decide to drop an item in their inventory. They select an object from a list of the current objects in their inventory (if their inventory is empty a message is displayed "Inventory Empty", and play continues). Once the object they wish to drop is selected, it is checked against the current inventory. If the object is unique (i.e. the object about to be dropped is the only one) a message is flagged "This is your only 'object name', do you wish to drop?" where the user clicks yes or no, if yes is clicked the item is dropped otherwise the user is returned to the inventory list. After every pick up the inventory is checked for If there are 11 items in the inventory (this would indicate a full set if the set is unique) If it is unique (no 2 items are the same) If the inventory satisfies both of these the game is ended, if there are not 11 items play continues, if there are 11 items a unique check is performed, if this proved false, the user is told their inventory is full and asked if they would like to drop an item, message flagged "Your inventory is full, you will not be able to pick up another object until you drop an object. Drop now?" where the user will enter y or n. y for yes and n for no, if they type y they are taken to the inventory list to drop an item, if they type n they return to play. <heading>2. b PseudoCode</heading>Notes: SI is the set of items in the inventory S2 is a set whish contains an item that has been picked up S3 is a subset of S3 which contains an object which the user has decided to drop. SC is a set which contains the complete list of 11 objects  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  <heading>3. Algorithm Properties</heading>Input: The objects 'picked up' are supplied by the play environment. Output: The sets change according to the objects which are picked up. Definiteness: Each of the sets starts with a zero value. The value changes as items are picked up/ dropped from the inventory. The SC set is effectively a control set (holding all the values which are required to finish the game) which can be checked against the inventory. Finiteness: The game finishes when the inventory equals the SC (control set), which means that the inventory is complete. The inventory is checked after every pick up as this is when items are added to the inventory as this is the when the inventory is changed. The inventory is also changed when items are dropped although seeing as the max for the inventory is 11 a check would have been performed when the last item was added. Effectiveness: Every if statement has a complimentary else statement. Instructions will take a finite amount of time as we are using comparisons between two sets, or value of sets. Correctness: The algorithm checks the inventory amount after every pick up so the termination requirements are checked every time something is added to the inventory. <heading>4. Efficiency</heading>The algorithm checks the inventory after every pick up rather than at every point something changes during play. When the inventory is being checked it is first checked for the amount of items in the inventory. If this number is less than 11 then play continues (as a user cannot have a full set of objects without 11 items) if 11 are found then the next stage is undertaken where the inventory is checked against the control set. <heading>5. </heading>Any application that store information on objects could use sets. For example books and multimedia in a library, the sets would contain books that are on the shelf, book on loan etc. An occasion where we use sets everyday is shopping, for an automated shopping list the objects are split into items on the self, items picked up and to be picked up. Another example would be a computer game of pool. The ball in the game would be split into sets of balls on the table; balls potted and on the table and could be split further into dots/stripes. 