<heading>Introduction</heading>The farm we visited is situated at Christmas Common, near Nettlebed, Oxon. The farm is approximately 300ha and is split into two main enterprises, Christmas trees and broadleaf woodland. The Christmas tree enterprise is the main business on the farm, with the farm now having significantly moved away from conventional agriculture. This is a move being taken by many farms in the UK given the current agricultural climate, as it is becoming increasingly more difficult to make a living from conventional farming alone. Farm diversification can take many different forms as the following table indicates: <table/>The need for farm diversification is becoming more apparent with the smaller family run farms, as these are the farms which are more likely to need to make an income from other means. This is because it is no longer economical for smaller farms to operate as efficiently as previously and therefore additional income is likely to be necessary. <table/><quote>'Diversification is always good, and Christmas tree farming does offer an opportunity to employ family members' (Source Purdue News 1999)</quote><heading>SWOT Analysis</heading>It is useful for businesses to conduct a SWOT analysis to look at the business strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats. The strengths and weaknesses of the business are those factors internal to the business and can also be more immediate. The opportunities and threats are external factors which may have an effect on the business and could be more long term factors. A SWOT analysis is an important management tool for a business and so will be useful for the farm to access how to manage the Christmas tree business and to look at the future prospects for the business. What is a SWOT analysis? <list>Strength - any aspect of the enterprise which can be translated into benefits of importance to consumersWeakness - any area of your enterprise in which you are performing badly, thus leading to a competitive disadvantageOpportunity - any area of the market which, of exploited, is likely to give you a competitive advantageThreat - any market factor which, if left unattended, is likely to lead to a deterioration in your market position</list>(Source MAFF 1994) <heading>Farm Strengths</heading>The farm at Christmas common has strengths in terms of the Christmas tree business, which help to make it a success. An important factor for growing Christmas trees is soil type. At the farm the soil is fairly acidic, this is ideal for good Christmas tree growth. The location of the farm is suited to Christmas tree growth as it is not a frost bucket, and it is important that Christmas trees do not suffer from late frosts. This is because 'young trees can be damaged by late spring frosts' (Source Notes on Growing Christmas trees 2005) Andrew Ingram, the farmer at Christmas Common, has been growing Christmas trees for a number of years now. This means that he has built up knowledge and experience in this field and therefore has an advantage over newcomers to this type of diversification. This will be helpful to the farm, because it means that in some instances Mr Ingram will have an advantageous position in this field. Mr Ingram has, in the past belonged to a marketing group, Needle Fresh. This again will have helped to give Mr Ingram an insight into the market for Christmas trees and also given him an idea of what other competition he is faced with. The farm has good storage facilities which are important for the period around Christmas. This is because, due to the type of service the Christmas tree business offer, storage is an important element for the felled trees. The farm try to offer a unique service, by providing customers with more than if they visited a local commercial store for their Christmas trees. The farm is situated close to the local population centre, and is also a fairly wealthy area, and therefore customers are likely to appreciate this added service and so will likely be an important selling point for the farm. The size of the farm is important for the growth of Christmas trees, because it means that the farm can have a continuous cycle of trees. This means that the farm is able to offer the most popular varieties of trees and also trees at different stages of development, and so heights and sizes to suit all. This is important as it means that customers have choice and therefore will not need to look elsewhere. The farm sells three main types of trees: <list>Spruce treesPine treesFir trees</list>These different types of trees require different spacing and therefore again indicate the importance of land availability. The following table indicates the number of trees that can be grown given the spacing required. <table/><heading>Farm Weaknesses </heading>There are some weaknesses associated with this type of enterprise. Firstly, the business is a seasonal business, which means there are significant amounts of work to be carried out in the run up to Christmas. This means that additional labour is required for tasks such as when the Christmas shop opens, for loading Christmas trees into customer's cars and for the felling of the trees. This work does not necessarily require skilled labour, although someone with experience is used for the felling. The farm could be seen to be very reliant on this one person, as he is used every year and therefore the farm could be faced with a problem if this person was no longer available. The other employees required around the Christmas period are likely to be temporary workers, and therefore there could be issues with the reliability of these staff. The staffs that are employed during this period tend to be Eastern European workers and in the future this could become an issue for the farm, because as standards of living increase in Eastern Europe, fewer workers are likely to come to the UK. A problem associated with the seasonal market for Christmas trees is that the farm will experience inconsistent cash flows throughout the year. This may mean that the farm will have problems with its budgeting and so could lead to financial problems if not managed effectively. There is also a possible weakness from damage by animals. The main animals to cause damage to Christmas trees are: <list>RabbitsInsects, with the main pest being aphidsDeer(Source Notes on Growing Christmas trees 2005)</list>As the farm is partly Broad leave woodland, the main risk from animals is from deer. Deer can be quite a problem with Christmas trees and in extreme cases deer fencing may be deemed necessary. <heading>Farm Opportunities and Threats</heading>At present nationally there is an over supply of Christmas trees. This can be viewed as both an opportunity and a threat. It is an opportunity because it means that due to this over supply, some Christmas tree growers may decide to move away from this business and therefore there will be more opportunity for the remaining growers. However, it can be seen as a threat because if there is no decline in Christmas tree growers, supply will continue to outstrip demand and therefore the market will be extremely competitive. The farm is selling direct to the customers and so is able to provide good customer service. This is important for the business because it means that the farm can build relationships with its customers and hopefully they will then continue to come to the farm on a yearly basis for their Christmas trees. The fairly recent venture of the Christmas shop is also an added bonus because it means that customers can also purchase Christmas items such as tree decorations and wreaths. The shop could be classed as an incentive for customers to come to the farm, because they can get everything they require in terms of decorations and a tree. This therefore indicates that selling direct to the customers is an opportunity for the farm. There is a long term market for Christmas trees because it is traditional to have a Christmas tree each year at Christmas. This means that the farm should not have to worry about there being no market for their trees. However, a threat that may be a concern to the farm is that artificial Christmas trees are starting to look more and more realistic and therefore more and more people may be opting to purchase these instead of real Christmas trees. This means that although there is a long term market for Christmas trees, the number of people actually demanding real Christmas trees could reduce. Also, as the trees grow on average for 6yrs before being felled, it is difficult for Mr Ingram to predict what is likely to happen to the market and Christmas tree prices in the next 6yrs. This means that there is some uncertainty associated with the Christmas tree industry, because due to the nature of the business, you are planting trees years in advance of actually selling them. Christmas trees can be a fire hazard at times and therefore this could be a threat to the farm. The threat comes from how closely the trees are planted and also all the weeds and undergrowth that builds up around the trees. This could have a potentially disastrous effect on the farm because it could destroy whole year's worth of crops. Disease could also be another potential threat for the farm, because if one tree is infected by disease then it likely to spread to others among the crop. This again could have serious effects on the business as it will affect sales and therefore profitability. <heading>Future options for the Farm</heading>At present the Christmas tree enterprise seems to be operating successfully. The farm has managed to distinguish itself from other competition in the market by offering a unique service and providing something a bit different. The area that the farm is situated in suggests that there will continue to be demand fro Christmas trees and the service the farm offers. This is because the farm is in a wealthy area and therefore potential customers are likely to have a higher disposable income and so may spend more on Christmas than people with a lower disposable income. This suggests that a future continuing what the farm is currently doing would be a possibility. The Christmas tree enterprise has been operating for a number of years, and has not yet suffered significantly from fire, animal or disease damage. This suggests that the farm is well managed with the appropriate action taken where necessary to avoid such problems. This therefore indicates that although these threats could occur, to date they have not so the threat should not be seen to be a major issue. The farm is coping at present with the staffing situation. However, this is an area that could cause concern for the farm in the future. This is because the farm is fairly heavily reliant on temporary staff during the run up to Christmas and if the farm cannot find the staff, it will definitely struggle. A possible solution to part of the problem could be that modern technology could intervene. However, staffing will remain a question for the future. I feel that the farm should continue along the same lines as it is at present. However, I feel there should be a few permanent staff taken on. Firstly, this will ease some of the pressure of finding additional staff during the busy Christmas period. This will also mean that Mr Ingram, who is not getting any younger, will be able to pass on his knowledge to other workers, who may be more able to do jobs which are becoming more of a problem for him. This could be jobs such as shearing the trees and dealing with weed control which could be more strenuous. Mr Ingram had a fairly positive outlook for the future of the business, which I think will partly be responsible for the continuing success of the business. The opening of the Christmas shop has also proved to be an important aspect for the Christmas tree business and given the recent expansion of the shop, this could also help with the continuing success of the business. 