<heading>Question 1 - Management of Risk You are leader of a project to develop a new software programme for your client that involves a team around you of three people, c20 weeks work and a cost of £ 100k to the customer... and it needs to work by February 2006. Do a 'contingency analysis' on it... what should you do to wreck it? Then turn it round and provide five important things to do to make it successful!Answer </heading>From the outset, the aim of the project will be unrealistic and not meet customer requirements. The members of the team must not get along functionally or socially. There must not be enough time, or any plans to recruit alternative staff should the need arise. No time will be wasted on planning. The team will not know where to start. The plan will never be updated if the project falls behind so that it becomes unachievable, thus killing motivation. As leader, I will endeavour to be deceitful and lazy whenever possible. I shall not make goals clear, nor reward my team for any successes. The project cannot overrun past 20 weeks. We will compromise performance and cost if necessary to reach this deadline. Turning the above around, the things I would do to make the project successful: <list>Present to the team a clear plan of a well thought out project.Prospective members of the team will take a psychometric test as part of the recruitment process.Update the project plan if it becomes unachievable.Consult the customer if the project may have to be compromised on cost, time or performance.Encourage and reward the team.</list><heading>Question 2 - Consultancy What issues may arise if a company uses consultants that are unethical? Identify two issues. Explain what the issue is and why it relates to the ethical behaviour of the consultant. For each issue suggest one thing a company could do to reduce the risk of it occurring.Answer </heading>The result of the consultation may not be exactly what was required. The company will take the consultants advice, and implement a solution that is not suitable or thorough. The consultant has manipulated the company's lack of understanding, and has not asked the company for its opinion where several options were available. This could be to save the consultant time and money. The result is that the company has a less than satisfactory outcome of the consultancy, and may not even be aware of it. The consultant must cover all the possible outcomes of the situation... unless the customer specifically excludes some options. For this to be ensured, the customer may have to do some basic research. The consultant may delegate certain aspects of the consultancy to inexperienced staff, who do not take all the necessary steps to ensure that the company's data remains securely looked after. Any consultant should be aware of the importance of data protection, but may choose to ignore it. The company should demand references from a consultant's previous customers, or only choose a consultant through recommendation. Failing these, the company should use a consultant with a reputable name. <heading>Question 3 - Law of Contracts How could the postal rule effect contemporary technological methods of communicating acceptance (e.g. email, webpage click-wraps, SMS)?Answer </heading>The postal rule was created to sort a problem where different communication methods took varying lengths of time to deliver a response. However, the new technological methods introduce a couple more problems: They are assumed to be instant communication, but any number of minor technical problems could cause a serious delay. The nature of our electronic communications networks often make it impossible to place blame for this delay. Delivery of a message does not necessarily mean it has been read. For example, requiring a computer terminal to read email introduces the idea that a response may not reach a person out of office hours or at the weekend. Messages such as email will pass through several servers on the way to their destination, making them far less secure than a postal letter, which will show visible signs of tampering if it has been read by any unauthorised persons. In the future, the postal rule could mean: Service providers must be able to guarantee, instant and secure delivery of communications. People will be held responsible for carefully selecting the medium they choose to communicate acceptance, depending on the time, date, nature of acceptance, and recipient. <heading>Question 4 - Management vs. Technical Careers Assume that you are a senior person in a high-technology industrial research organisation. Your management has expressed concern about the effect of "disruptive technologies" on the business. How would you define a strategy for the technical community to recognise and inform the company about potential "disruptive technologies" that are likely to affect the business, either as a threat or as an opportunity? Note that a "disruptive technology" is one which will either radically transform a market, create a wholly new market, or destroy an existing market. (Possible prize to be given by Thales for best strategy)Answer </heading>Any strategy for dealing with disruptive technology should cover these key parts: <list>Recognizing disruptive technology.Knowing when the technology is sufficiently developed to replace old technology.EITHERImproving current technology to competeORFinding a migration strategy with minimal disruption to business</list>To thoroughly analyse all potential disruptive technologies would be over the top; many technologies often fail to fulfil their expectations, and new standards form slowly over time. Therefore, the technical community must identify issues which it thinks are key to the business success in near future (e.g. the next 3 years). The number of these issues should be kept low (e.g. 5 per year). The ideas could be presented annually at a 'new technologies meeting', ensuring that all are properly documented. The long time between meetings will give technical staff time to carefully gauge the impact of a technology. Should the same technology arise several years in a row, then it should almost certainly be given serious consideration. The company must decide on a plan of action individually for each technology, rather than stick to a regular policy, which could see the company left behind or stranded with unpopular ideas. <heading>Question 5 - Quality Part 1: What sort of people challenges would you face when introducing a new quality process in a large well established organisation with processes in place already? Part 2: How would you go about implementing these changes?Answer </heading><heading>Part 1</heading>A new quality process will probably be met with opposition from many employees. This will frustrate supporters of the scheme (probably managers), and they will apply more pressure to you to have the process introduced. If not all employees are affected by, or opposed to, the new process, there could be a splitting of the workforce, socially and functionally. Alternatively, if all employees are affected you could be completely ostracized, seen as trying to interfere. Out of spite, or because of a loss of attraction to their job positions, employees might be less motivated. <heading>Part 2</heading>To try and introduce the process smoothly, you must first demonstrate to the employees the need for this new process, and its benefits. You should try to minimise the effect it will have on their time, and show that you have done so. Finally, emphasise the value of the new skills they will learn. <heading>Question 6 - Business Management You are asked to prepare a brief report for your fellow company directors on a competitor company. Using the internet as a resource, examine any PLC company of your choice, prepare a report which includes a minimum of five key indicators, explaining the significance of each indicator and why you have chosen it.Answer </heading>BT plc <table/>According to about.com, "In most cases, the diluted earnings-per-share figure is far more accurate estimation of the total earnings per share and receive special attention when valuing a company." However, in this case, the EPS values are inconsistent with the actual events at BT. In 2001, BT sold several services to try and reduce debts. This is reflected by the smaller turnover and employee count in 2002. BT also cut back its dividend payouts in 2002 as another part of the debt reduction process. The gradual increase in dividends since 2002 shows that BT is now much happier with the state of its finances. Finally, the profits seem to have settled at around 2,800, showing that the new business plan is not only profitable, but sustainable. 