<heading>Introduction</heading><heading>Situation</heading>I am the owner and manager of a 180ha farm in the county of Berkshire. The basis of its farming activities is milk production, and at one time over 300 cows were milked. Latterly the number of cows has been reduced, but it remains a dairy farm. In addition to the dairy cows, there are also some sheep and some cereal production. Staff include a dairy herdsman, tractor driver and my 19 year old son, currently at university, who helps out during holidays. The job of a farm manager is multi-faceted and demanding, as it requires hands on work outside alongside a vast amount of paperwork. However it contains many aspects that are common to all forms of management. The organisational goals for any manager are to maximise output, while minimising input. <heading>Objective</heading>As a manager, I want to make my farm business as efficient as I possibly can in order to make a profit and create a sustainable future for myself and my staff. In order to do this I need to stay ahead of my competitors. Many larger farms employ farm managers alongside the farm owner to run the farm together, however I have the challenging job of undertaking both roles. Yet, at the same time I feel that this puts me in an ideal location as I am seeing the ownership and management of the farm from both perspectives. Although my farm is relatively small I still think that it is important to manage the business as thoroughly as a large public company would be managed, for this way every aspect of the farm will be examined and any inefficient areas of production will be highlighted. There are many different aspects to management, for a start I must look at the role that I myself play in the business, but I also must look at what affects my business, which direction I want my business to travel in, how I work towards achieving business targets and how I manage the financial assets of the business. These aspects are all of equal importance to me and used together they allow me to manage my business effectively. My objective in this report is to explain how I have adapted the main functions of management to suit my business and make the most of the resources available to me. <heading>Managerial Roles</heading>As a farm manager I have to take on many different roles, I must plan, organise, lead, control and be responsible for the future of my farm. That in turn leads me to be responsible for the future of my workforce, to a certain extent. That puts a lot of pressure on me to make the right decisions. There are three main types of skills involved in management and these go as follows:- <list>ConceptualUnderstanding the ways in which farm productivity can be maximised by researching the market at present.Thinking of new ways of moving the farm business forward. To do this I must study the industry and take note of important changes that could shape my future.Constructing plans of how a new idea can fit into the existing system.Taking responsibility in selecting new ideas.Having the knowledge of staff to apply jobs to those best suited.HumanAble to give a coherent explanation to the workforce which will enable them to have a better understanding of the task.Possessing motivational skills that will cause the workforce to reach maximum output.Meet with key players outside of the farm e.g. Bank manager, to engage support.Gain key information from salesmen e.g. grain traders, machinery representatives.TechnicalUnderstand the machinery used so maximum output and lifespan can be gained from it.An understanding can also enable empathy with the staff carrying out operations.Technical knowledge and ability is important in order to gain respect from the staff.</list>In other industries there are many different classes of management, but in my position of farm manager I am a general manager. I have more than one focus as I have to manage, implement and achieve goals. According to Mintzberg, 1973, a manager fulfils informational, interpersonal and decisional roles. These roles are all part of the tasks that a manager should complete, but often one role will help to complete more than one task. <heading>Informational Roles</heading><list>Monitor - Activity within the farm, farming activity in the wider community and economic activity.Disseminator - Receive information from my staff.Spokesperson - Give information to the bank and other outside companies that I feel will benefit the business.</list><heading>Interpersonal Roles</heading><list>Figurehead - Invited to attend meetings, may be asked to speak or occasionally interviewed on my experiences. I am the public face of the farm.Leader - Direct and motivate staff towards their work.Liaison - Discuss information from similar information sources e.g. fellow farm managers, or outside information sources.</list><heading>Decisional Roles</heading><list>Entrepreneurial - Decide on new ways to solve existing problems and implement them.Disturbance handler - Deal with machinery/staff problems, find solutions and occasionally this may lead to me having to deal with the public.Resource Allocator - Decide on the most financially rewarding use of staff, machinery, livestock and capital.Negotiator - Formal bargaining with the bank, dealers, traders and reps.</list>Not all of these roles will carry equal importance for me as a farm manager, but I can guarantee that I will need to employ each of them at some point during my career as a manager. The roles that I feel carry the most importance to me are that of a monitor, disseminator, leader, entrepreneur, resource allocator and negotiator. <heading>The Manager's Environment</heading>There are three main levels of environment I, as the farm manager must study in order to achieve a successful business and these are the General environment, the Task environment and the Internal environment. By devoting a large amount of attention to the Internal environment I will achieve immediate success with the business, however, to provide the farm with a long term future I must also closely study the General and Task environments to see how the farm can compete and improve its position in the market. <heading>General Environment</heading>The General environment is also known as the PEST analysis as it studies the Political, Economic, Socio-cultural and Technological factors that affect a business and it goes as follows: - Political - Measures introduced by the Government and the EU such as the Common Agricultural Policy and Single Farm Payment. These must be obeyed to gain subsidies, although sometimes they can affect productivity. There is also much legislation concerning employee welfare and environmental protection that has to be complied with and this is both costly and time consuming. Economic - Not only must I consider the location of my farm within my country but also within the world. A farm located within a poorer region of either the country or the world will find it harder to compete at a national/global market meaning that they will then be low on finances to purchase more resources. Thus they are then left further behind in the competition. Socio-cultural - Public tastes in both the UK and the world are often changing. I must move with these changes and understand them to keep my customers and stay in business. Technological - Technology is constantly being developed in the agricultural sector, pushing farming forward and improving efficiency. As a farm manager I cannot always afford new technology and am sometimes left behind. Within the General environment also lies the International environment. As a farm manager, my business not only competes with the national market, but also within the global market. There may be occurrences abroad that can affect the UK market. A perfect example of this occurred in the summer of 2006, as most of Europe and Australia was hit by drought bringing their harvest yields down. This resulted in a greater demand for UK produced grain, so therefore the price offered to British farmers rose. <heading>Task Environment</heading>The main key players to any business lie within the Task environment as is explained below: - Customers - As the farm manager I need to monitor trends of customer preferences to see where the finished product of my business can meet their needs. This also allows me to distinguish where customers are not being served by their producers and to fill this area in order to prevent customers from leaving me as a producer. Competitors - My fellow farmers are able to produce the same product as I and some to better value. If I want my farm to stay in business I have to predict the trends in farming to stay ahead of other famers so that I am able to differentiate my product. For my product to become preferable, it must stand out in the market, either as value added, or good value. Suppliers - The supplier sets the price of good sold to farmers. I must find the cheapest supplier selling the best quality goods to get the most benefit from them. However, should stocks of certain products become low, the suppliers know that they have the monopoly over the farmer and are able to charge hideously high prices at the farmers loss. Labour Market - If the labour market is full, I get greater choice over staff at lower wages. However, if the labour market is poor then staff chosen are of poor quality and at high expense. This reduces the farm profit. However this is less of an issue for myself as I already have two very good full time members of staff. Yet when my son finishes university he will no longer be able to work seasonally for me and I will have to look for another student to fill his void. <heading>Internal Environment</heading>The Internal environment looks at work towards reaching goals and those who can aid the process, as is shown below:- Employees - The happiness of my employees has a big impact on the success of the farm. A happy employee will work beyond the call of duty to do something that they think will help. Unhappy employees can be a drag on resources, as not only will their presence be costing money, but also they may not use equipment in an efficient manner. Culture - I must employ either a directional or ambiguous leadership style depending on where I feel the power balance should lie. I personally prefer to use a directional style, but as my staff are experienced, I like to give them a little more freedom so that they feel in control. Management - As the farm manager, I must look carefully at resources, particularly staff. An understanding of my staff means that I can unite them to work as a team and increase success rates. I must know their strengths and weaknesses. I must also understand where other resources are best applied and have valid goals for the future of the farm. <heading>Stakeholders</heading>The traditional view of a stakeholder is "someone who temporarily holds money or property while its owner is being determined" (Wikipedia 2006). Stakeholders can also be described as "interest groups." Within the farming business there are many stakeholders, the main ones of which are listed below: - Customers - These are people who are affected by the outcome of the business and who can influence it, but are not directly involved with doing any of the work on a day to day basis. An example of a customer could be the bank should it have to loan the farm money. Consumers are also part of the customer group as they have the power to sway the farms future. Employees - These are people who are affected by any outcome taken by the farm. Manager - I am an individual with an interest in the businesses success in delivering intended results and in maintaining the viability of the business. Local Agricultural Society/Local NFU Branch - These two groups participate in a community mobilisation effort, representing our particular segment of society, which is farming. <heading>Business Strategy</heading>In order for the farm business to be successful, I must analyse the business in its current state regularly to identify its strengths and weaknesses. This then allows me to set realistic targets for the business which will produce the most beneficial results. The setting of targets involves a complicated process of studying, planning and organisation and the success of this relies on good strategic management. <heading>SWOT Analysis</heading>An accurate SWOT analysis is crucial for setting accurate targets that are achievable. SWOT stands for the Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats of a business and it is a valuable method of identifying the key areas of business that need to be improved. The strengths and weaknesses are both part of the internal environment of the business, whereas the threats and opportunities are influence by the external environment. I conducted a SWOT analysis of my farm business and the findings are shown below:- Strengths - The farm is involved in three markets as it produces dairy products, lamb and cereal crops. This reduces its vulnerability should the demand for one of these three products be reduced. Staff are kept to a minimum, reducing the financial cost of wages and seasonal labour is guaranteed in my son, who also has the added benefit of already knowing the farm and its mechanics. With only having two full-time men, I have good experience of how they work and where their skills lie. This means that I can employ them efficiently and get the best performance out of them. I am on the farm daily so I understand exactly how my current targets and strategies are working. This should help me set new targets in the future. Weaknesses - The farm is relatively small and although it is primarily a dairy farm the number of cows has been reduced so that it no longer specialises in the production of any one product. If it was specialised towards one area we would find our production costs decreasing for that area. Employing a small number of employees causes trouble for the farm should one of them become ill, as that leaves a lot, or possibly too much work for the others to take on. Looking to the future, the seasonal labour that is currently used on the farm will no longer be available once they he has finished University in two years time. Opportunities - Due to the farm's small size it would be easy for it to improve the quality of produce so that it can sell to a higher paying processor, such as Waitrose or Marks and Spencer. Alternatively the farm could diversify into organic produce, or make use of other profitable assets (Lantra, 2006). For example old farm buildings could be converted into offices or stables. Threats - Because the farm aims to supply produce to three different areas, it does not produce a tremendous volume towards one particular area. This leaves its position in the market as vulnerable. It could easily be pushed out of the market by a larger competitor. For example it is more economical and simplifies the business for a milk company to collect milk from just one large farm, as opposed to several small farms. Other threats lie within the possibility of changes to government policies towards agricultural production and national laws concerning care of employees. Demand for British agricultural produce could decrease, resulting in the farm receiving a lower price for its goods. There could also be major technological advances in agriculture culminating in the farm having to lose a tremendous amount of capital in order to keep up with competitors, or risk being pushed out of the market within a short space of time. <heading>Farm Achievement Goal</heading>Taking into account the information that the SWOT analysis identified, I have formulated a goal for the farm business to achieve over the next two years. That goal is to ensure its future by maintaining staffing levels, maximising profits from assets and by looking at changes for the future. I feel that the goal is fully achievable, but will improve the business' efficiency My proposed strategy for the goal is as follows:- <list>To continue with the production of dairy, lamb and cereal crops, but to raise the quality of these products to a satisfactory level so they are then accepted by higher paying buyers.To look into the initial costs and benefits that would come from converting the farm from commercial to organic. To renovate existing unoccupied farm buildings into stabling, as a basic livery yard is a cheap and easy way of earning extra money and will at least make the buildings pay for themselves.To find a replacement seasonal worker for when the two years are completed.</list>In order to implement my strategy, I must look at two different levels of strategy formulation; business level and functional level. The corporate level is contained in my proposed strategy. <heading>Business Level Strategy Formulation</heading>Differentiation of product - I am researching organic farming, which if suitable for the farm would differentiate my product from that of many other farms, as it would form part of a niche market, making it more valuable. Cost leadership - The farm will produce goods at a higher quality to a lower input price and will offer horse accommodation at a competitive price go gain more customers, maximising the profit made. Focus - The farm is producing goods to the higher quality end of the market and also should it be suitable to be farmed organically, it will then be able to focus on the organic market, making it more specialised. Partnership strategies - The farm may need to work with the bank in order to gain funding for the change to an organic system. The farm will also need to work with existing organic farmers so that it can gain full research. <heading>Functional Level Strategy Formulation</heading>Marketing - The farm will need to advertise the newly renovated stables in suitable locations e.g. tack shop, feed merchant. It can also advertise the need for a new seasonal worker at the local agricultural college. Meetings will have to be organised with higher paying buyers to demonstrate the improved quality of the farm produce. Production - The farm must study existing imputs into the dairy, lamb and cereal production systems that it already uses and see where efficiency can be improved. By that I expect to look at how the feeds, housing, fertiliser, etc. can be improved to meet demands more accurately without increasing costs. Finance - The goal that I set is designed to require minimum extra finance. However, in order to renovate the existing farm buildings to stabling, an initial cost will be required. This will be negotiated with the bank or other shareholders in the business. Improving the quality of the farm produce should not require any extra money. Human Resources - The farm must engage the support of the bank, higher paying bankers and existing organic farmers, for research purposes. The farm must also maintain the loyalty of its staff to increase the chance in success of its goal. The largest chance of the farm securing a new seasonal worker is by forging links with the local agricultural college. Research and Development - The farm must research organic systems suitable for its own through existing publications and the experience of farmers who have already changed to organic. Above I have simply detailed strategy formulation, but I believe that it should not be much different from strategy implementation. I am responsible for the implementation of the entire goal, but I personally will have to undertake the carrying out of much of the above as both the farmer and the manager. I feel that I will be more than capable of carrying this out during the two year period ahead. However the task will then change from strategic formulation to strategic management and I then have to direct resources for strategic outcomes. Although I am sure of my own dedication to achieving the right outcomes I can only push my employees so far and I must just rely on their support in improving the business. <heading>Motivational Leadership</heading>As the farm manager I am automatically the leader for my employees. Leadership will always involve a certain aspect of Machiavellianism, for a leader must manipulate others slightly for personal gain, as this maximises the profit of their business. Manipulation can take various forms, but the most effective manipulation of employees must result in an increase in their motivation to work. Motivational skills are one of the essential possessions of a good leader, along with an aptitude for communication and the ability to encourage teamwork. I personally find the use of motivational skills to be very important in my industry, as to get the best out of employees, they have to want to fulfil the task set. In order to improve my own personal motivational skills I found it useful to study various existing motivational theories. <heading>House's Path-Goal Model</heading>House's Path-Goal Model is based on the belief that the leader's function is to clear the path toward the goal of the group, by meeting the needs of subordinates (Wikipedia, 2006). In order to achieve this I will guide my employees towards choosing the best path that will enable to job to be completed and it involves my engagement in different types of leadership depending on situation. The different forms of leadership are summarised below:- Achievement Oriented - I expect the most out of my employees, especially when I consider them to be doing easy tasks, such as the washing off of a tractor. Directive - I set my employees non-specific tasks, such as the mucking out of a cattle pen. I expect them to achieve the desired results if I tell them what tools they can use to carry out the task and what the end product of their work should be. Participative - If an employee isn't completing the task properly, for example they are power harrowing a field and the machine isn't cultivating the field to the correct depth, I ask for their opinion on the problem and together we solve it. Supportive - If an employee is unconfident about the task that I have set them, for example running the drier during harvest, I use a friendly and approachable attitude towards them. The sum of these different forms of leadership is that I have to be flexible in the way in which I deal with my employees. Different situations call for different managerial styles. <heading>Vroom and Yetton's Normative Model</heading>Vroom and Yetton's Normative Model is based on the principal that there are 5 different decision procedures involved in leadership: 2 are autocratic, 2 are consultative and 1 is group based (Changing Minds, 2006). By autocratic I mean that I am solely responsible for the decision making procedure, by consultative I mean that I discuss the problem with others, but ultimately still make the decision myself and by group based I mean that I share the problem with others and we make the decision together. The first autocratic decision procedure is based on me taking known information and making the decision alone. It is very similar to the second autocratic decision procedure, which only differs in the fact that I take the information on which I base my decision from my employees. I would use the first autocratic procedure in situations where I am confident that my knowledge and use of it is better than that of my employees, for example when selling corn to a grain trader. The second autocratic procedure is better for use in situations where I feel my employees may have a useful perspective on the situation, but due to my position as farm manager, I must ultimately make the decision. This procedure may be called for when deciding on the cattle feed rations, or other such situations. The first consultative decision procedure is based on me sharing problems with my employees individually and then deciding alone. The second consultative decision procedure is different in that I share problems with my employees as a group. I use the first consultative procedure in situations where the information that my employees give me may include personal opinions, such as the negotiation of wages. I use the second consultative procedure to solve problems that I feel require group input, such as the allocation of jobs, as I feel that it is important to hear from my employees on which jobs they feel best suited too, or whether they have particular objections to certain tasks. The group decision procedure is based on me not having sufficient knowledge, so I share the problem with my employees and encourage them to decide with me. I personally have never used this method as I feel that as the farm manager it should be my responsibility to make the final decision. <heading>Alderfer's ERG Theory</heading>Alderfer's ERG Theory is an expansion of Maslow's hierarchy of needs, where ERG stands for Existence, Relatedness and Growth needs. In order to keep my employees happy and motivated in their work it is important for me to ensure that all three needs are met. My employees existence needs are satisfied by acknowledging their presence and importance in the workplace. Sometimes this involves my complimenting their work and reassuring them that they are doing a good job. My employees relatedness needs are satisfied by their having friendship and company and this has been easily accomplished by giving them fellow employees. To the best of my knowledge they enjoy each others company. My employees growth needs can be satisfied by aiding their personal development. All of my employees have had to attend various courses and complete tests, such as the Sprayer Operative test, at different stages in their working lives and this will have enriched their progress as an individual. <heading>McClelland's Acquired Needs Theory</heading>McClelland's Acquired Needs Theory is based around the theory that people in general fall into three different categories; those that need achievement, those that need affiliation and those that need power (Business Knowledge Centre, 2006). Employees with a high need for achievement seek to excel in general. They avoid low risk situations with no danger or chance of failure as these are seen as not being genuine achievement. They also need regular feedback to monitor progress and they prefer to work alone, or with other high achievers. I personally prefer employees with a high need for achievement because I feel that they produce the best results in the working environment of the farm. The farm is best suited to confident staff as it offers employees the chance to take on high levels of responsibility and manage tasks individually so they can see their own results. Employees with a high need for affiliation like to feel accepted. They wish to conform to the norms of a work group and prefer work that provides significant personal interaction. I don't feel that this group of employees are particularly suited to working on a farm as farm staff often have to spend many hours working alone, especially when working arable land. However, employees with a high need for affiliation can sometimes enjoy working with stock as the company of the cattle is a slight substititute to that of humans. Also working with stock generally requires the resources of more than one employee. I am not particularly keen on employees with a high need for power and they certainly would not fit in with working on my farm. Employees with a high need for power need to be put in managerial positions to get the best results and as I am the farm manager on my farm it really would not work as I could not put them in the position that they would enjoy most. <heading>Herzberg's Two-Factor Theory</heading>The Two-Factors involved in Herzberg's theory are those that lead to dissatisfaction and those that lead to satisfaction. The factors that lead to dissatisfaction are company policy, supervision, relationship with myself, work conditions, salary and relationship with fellow workers. Most of these factors should be at least satisfactory, but even the provision of these will not make staff happy and will only motivate them extrinsically. To make my employees happy in their work and motivated to complete it I must ensure that they are fulfilled towards the factors that lead to satisfaction. These factors are achievement, recognition, work itself, responsibility, advancement and growth. Because the factors leading to satisfication are not just opposites of those leading to dissatisfication, I have to work especially hard to make sure that my employees feel secure in both areas. <heading>Financial and Budgetary Analysis</heading>As the farm manager it is important that I take full control of the farm accounts and employ a full analysis, as this is yet another area in which I can discover new methods of making the farm more efficient. Although I may already have suspicions over which areas of my business are leading to profit and which are losing money, a thorough financial analysis allows me to accurately determine which areas these may be and I can then make changes to my business to either continue efficiency, or improve it. I require both a financial and a budgetary analysis to identify the areas that need change and then calculate how this could be achieved. The financial analysis is the first step in this process. <heading>Financial Analysis</heading>The first task for me when conducting a financial analysis is assess the farms goals in performance, solvency (whether or not a bank or supplier can safely grant credit) and potential value (whether an investment will be positive). The main way in which I do this is by comparing financial ratios, but first I have to calculate them. There are three main financial ratios that I study and these are that of return on equity, return on assets and Price to Earnings ratio (Wikipedia, 2006). They are calculated in the following ways: -  FORMULA   FORMULA   FORMULA  The figures I use are taken from my annual financial balance sheet. The balance sheet includes the physical resources that the business has, such as tractors and also the financial assets that the business has gained, such as those from share holders. When comparing the farms financial ratios I can do this in a variety of different ways. The first method is to compare the financial ratios across historical time periods, such as 5 years to see how the business has developed, or regressed against itself. I then compare the ratios to the forecasts of the business' anticipated performance to see if these are still attainable. The next step is to compare my financial ratios to those of similar business'. It is easiest to compare them to neighbouring farms, preferably those of a similar size, as these will have to deal with the same limiting factors as myself and therefore we should get similar results. However, the comparison of financial ratios is not always completely accurate, for they fail to account for consumer behaviour and as this differs, it can lead to anomalous results in some ratios. Also there is also the problem that seasonal factors can influence results, so I find it more useful to use averages, as this lessens the effect. Another form of improving accuracy when conducting the comparison is to combine several related ratios to form a more comprehensive picture. The use of a financial analysis only demonstrates to me how my business has performed in the past year and how it is proceeding in terms of targets. This does not help me tremendously in deciding how I will conduct my business in the coming year. In order to determine this I must employ a budgetary analysis. <heading>Budgetary Analysis</heading>By conducting a budgetary analysis, I am able to determine how to efficiently distribute my limited financial resources (Bureau of Labour Statistics, 2005). Through my role as farm manager, one of the areas of the farm that I am continually working to increase is that of profits in general and my budgetary analysis should assist this. The main methods in which I carry out a budgetary analysis are explained below: - Preparation of the annual budget - This will include proposed funding for the coming year, any new initiatives that I wish to put into practice, estimated costs and expenses for the year and capital expenditures that need to be invested in. Examination of the budget for conformance with organisational objectives - The budget must conform with organisational objectives for the farm to achieve its mission statement. Employment of cost-benefit analysis to examine alternative funding incase this proves to have more financial gains. Following on from these main methods, which are part of the initial review, I will also look at departmental budgets, such as those given to my dairy unit, or to my arable unit and I will then consolidate these into operational and capital budget summaries. Throughout the year I also periodically monitor the budget every 3 months and analyse deviation. If deviation occurs I may have to implement new, or revised budget procedures. Should I wish to diagnose the farm business' financial condition, I would probably implement a financial analysis, but that would only illustrate fully, the business' situation when coupled with a budgetary analysis, as that puts the amount of money available to be invested within the business into context. In addition to financial and budgetary analysis' there are various other methods available to me to use for measuring and controlling the organisational performance of the farm, the main ones of which are by analysis of the Cash Flow Statement, the Profit and Loss Statement and by looking at Share values. Cash Flow Statement - Cash Flow Statement states where the cash received has come from and what the business has spent it on. Ideally the cash received should be greater than the amount of cash spent in order for the business to be efficient. Should the farm be proved as efficient, then my intention would be to reinvest the cash surplus into the farm again, hopefully to double the cash surplus produced in the next financial year. Profit and Loss Statement - Profit and Loss Statement is based on business transactions. It is particularly useful as it shows the profit I made following taxation. When the cost of goods is deducted from the profit, the purchase of goods that need to be made in the next financial year are also deducted to give a more realistic view of the finances that will be available to me. In addition to this, depreciation is calculated. Share Values - The analysis of Share Values is relatively simplistic. However, it can only be conducted if the business sells shares on the internet. The change in price of the share of the business is a very good indication of how well the business is doing at that point, but the share price is very sensitive to change to does not give a fair view of how the business is doing over the course of a year. Between the above three methods, I would find the Profit and Loss Statement the most useful, for the Cash Flow Statement is too simplistic and would be easily distorted by trivial matters. Share Values certainly have no use to me, for my business is not large enough to sell shares for it over the internet. Therefore that leaves the Profit and Loss Statement. I cannot find any major problems with this method that would prevent me from employing it, however I feel that the financial and budgetary analysis' are the best two methods for a business, such as my own to use, for they work so well together. <heading>Summary</heading>A farm business is possibly not the easiest business to apply management theories to, for it is ever changing and no two jobs are ever the same. That is why it is of high importance that I review my management strategy frequently and that it remains flexible in the mean time to allow for these alterations. Although I am the farm manager, I find that there are many situations where I value the opinion of my employees. All three of my employees have worked for me for such a long period of time that I believe that in some cases they know more than me about the land and the livestock that they are working with. This is mainly a result of the increase in paperwork that has meant I now spend more time in the office than I do in the field. However, this has meant that I now feel able to participate in a more consultative management style and I think that this has benefited the team. Currently there are many farmers leaving agriculture. One main reason for this is their inability to keep up with the changes in technology and consumer demand. To me, conducting a SWOT analysis is of particular importance because of this. I am also glad that I take the time to look at the external environment of my business. Because of this I am able to keep abreast of the changes that occur and plan how I will my business to fit in around them. I am particularly pleased with the goal that I have set the farm business to achieve, as I feel that it is attainable and having studied the current trends in consumerism, I feel it should guarantee my business a place in the future agricultural market. Although there are big management tasks that must be completed, such as the setting of annual targets, the small tasks are of equal importance. As manager I must support my team on a daily basis to ensure that they are motivated and to check that they are conducting tasks as I expect them too. For although I trust their judgement and their ability, I cannot afford to have any slight weaknesses in my business. Even if I had the resources to employ a separate farm manager, I don't know if I would wish to as I prefer to know myself, for sure how my business is working in terms of resources, production and competition. If the farm is working efficiently towards all three of these goals then I am employing good management. 