<heading>Procedure</heading>This practical involved weighing all food items consumed over a period of 3 days in order to estimate the individual's intake of energy and nutrients. A set of weighing scales was provided and all foods consumed were recorded and weighed separately so as to facilitate component analysis when entered into the data processing program: Food Base 3.1. This program utilised McCance and Widdowson's composition of food tables in The Composition of Foods (6th Ed., 2002: 5th 1978 and 5th Ed: 1991) to derive the energy and selected nutrients' compositions of each item of food. The resultant data was compared to the DRVs (Dietary Reference Values) for each food. <heading>Results </heading><table/><heading>Discussion</heading>The results of my data analysis showed an interesting pattern of nutrient deficiencies. When my daily intakes were compared with the DRVs my diet showed deficiencies in all the given minerals and even deficiencies in protein and fibre. However, my vitamin levels were all above or equivalent to the DRVs - without having taken any vitamin supplements. This set of results denotes that my diet is sufficiently diverse to supply me with the right amount of vitamins yet is somehow extremely inefficient when it comes to minerals. Most minerals were in fact found to be almost half the DRVs. Iron and Magnesium - two of the most important minerals - when compared to the RNIs (Reference Nutrient Intake) were shown to be far below even the LRNI (Lower RNI) of 8g and 190g respectively (my intakes: Iron: 5.9g, Magnesium: 114.9g). However, although my vitamin intake would appear to only be border-line for my needs (using DRVs), it is in fact far in excess in many vitamins when looked at in relation to RNIs. Although most of the vitamins and minerals show the same value for their DRV and their RNI, vitamins such as Thiamin and Niacin Equivs are exceptions. In both cases the RNIs are half that of the DRVs (Thiamine: 0.8mg vs. 0.4mg and Niacin Equivs: 13.0mg vs. 6.6mg), thus making my vitamin intake appear far greater. However, such a high level of deficiencies (mainly in minerals) obviously demands a drastic change of my diet. I need to eat far more fruit and vegetables. It would be of use to consider levels of a particular nutrient upon buying a product - in order to buy a variety of food that would cater to my nutritional needs. Buying spinach, for example, would be good in order to increase my magnesium intake. Likewise, drinking more milk will increase my potassium and calcium intake, while eating more mushrooms and meat will improve my intake of Selenium and Zinc respectively. Thus, by varying my diet more I should manage to incorporate higher levels of all vitamins and minerals into my diet and so help eradicate my present deficiencies. In terms of energy, protein and fibre I'm far below recommended levels (DRVs and RNIs). However, energy and protein intakes can vary without being detrimental to health as they only need to surpass my energy expenditure - which in this case they do as on those particular days I did not exercise much. Yet, in terms of where I get my energy from might be relevant. I am in fact getting more energy from fat than should be the case, where in contrast I'm getting less energy from sugar than I should be getting. In fact, on these particular days an explanation as to why I had so many deficiencies may have been due to my only getting up at midday. This will no doubt have affected my results and so in reality it might be best to view theses intakes in terms of two days as opposed to 3 in order to imitate the normal daily pattern. If this where done then I'm sure my levels of deficiencies would be far lower. This can be seen as one of the potential inaccuracies that could arise from this method of diary assessment. Other such problems include subjects not bothering or not willing to weigh all the food products, the unavailability of certain products in the Food Base (2001) archive and lastly the difficulty and impracticality involved when faced with weighing foods - especially outside of the home environment. In comparison with other methods, the Weighed Diet Diary has its pros and cons. Alternatives such as the Retrospective Dietary Assessments: Dietary History, 24 Hour Recall and Food Frequency Questionnaire, all have the advantage of not requiring a set of scales everywhere you go, yet they fall short of the accuracy of the Weighed method. This is due to the fact that subjects are likely to forget some food items consumed as it relies heavily on memory. When compared to methods that involve estimating the food consumed - such as a Non-Weighing Diet Diary or a Photographic Record, one can see that these method are simpler yet can still lead to inaccuracies due to the subjects altering their diets. The methods considered the most accurate (deemed the 'gold standard') are the Weighed Food Intake diets. These include the Duplicate Diet, PETRA (Personal Electronic Tape Recording scAles) and the method used in this case - the Weighed Diet Diary. Thus, one would be tempted to say that the Weighed Diet Diary is one of the best, if not the best, method for assessing a subjects' diet. However, as with virtually all the other method this too may involve the subject altering their diet. 