Shinfield farm is situated outside of Reading and is owned by the University of Reading; the farm covers an area of 1200 acres of farmable land, the main enterprise of the farm is the dairy unit, which comprises of at present 550 Holstein Friesian dairy cows. The other enterprises on the farm are a commercial flock of Scottish Greyface sheep, and also the research that is carried out on the farm in the centre for dairy research and the animal production research unit. The cows are feed on a 50/50 mix of maize and grass, both of which comes from the farm, the farm grows 400 acres of maize and 150 acres of wheat which is used as whole crop wheat silage in times of shortages, otherwise it is combined, with the grain being fed to the cows and the straw being used for bedding. The cows are also fed on concentrates which are delivered to the farm on a lorry and stored in bays, it contains a mix of Soya, Rape, Barley, Kale and Wheat, and it also contains minerals supplements. The cows are fed 12kg of concentrate a day, the concentrate is mixed with the silage using a mixer wagon, the mix is then tipped on the floor in front of the cows, a mix of 9 tonnes will feed 180 cows The feeding system on the farm could be modified to help increase milk yield, currently all the cows are fed the same rations throughout the year, changing to a Complete diet or Traditional methods may help to increase the milk yield, in these systems the cows are feed different amounts of concentrates depending on their stage of lactation and the yield being produced. The complete diet could be implemented on the farm by splitting the cows into groups depending on their stage of lactation, and then the correct amount of concentrates can be fed to each group to achieve the maximum milk yield. Calving starts in July and will continue through until December, with there being around 100 calves born in July, August and September and less in remaining months. Once the cows have calved they are kept inside until the spring, then those producing under 30 litres a day will be turned out to the grass while those over 30 litres will stay in. The milk is sold at 19 pence a litre, the farm is in the high hygiene bracket and has a volume bonus, this helps to increase the milk price, the farm also receives a London premium of 1.75p as it is situated near the London market. The milk buyer encourages the farm to produce more milk in autumn and will give a higher price for it then this is one reason for summer calving, the milk is all sold to the Dairy Farmers of Britain and is collected every other day by a tanker. The milking is carried out in a newly built 50 point rotary parlour, this has increased efficiency, the old parlour only had the capacity for 400 cows and it took four hours to complete all milking, the new parlour has the capacity for 600 cows, and can operate at 240 cows an hour, at present the parlour averages 150 cows per hour. The milking is done in 9 groups, milking is carried out twice a day, and will occasionally take place three times a day for research purposes. The dairy unit is operated by three people, two carry out the milking, one prepares the teat while the other fits the teat cups, the third person marshals the cows to the parlour and ensures they are constantly moving in and out of the parlour, there are also automatic gates and a teat sprayer to help with this process. The average cell count is 199, and is currently at 251, the current milk output is 8750 litres per cow per year with fat at 4% and protein at 3.3%. The milk yield for this herd is in the high to very high bracket (source: Farm Management Pocketbook), and the butterfat and protein levels of the milk are exactly on what the standard litre is expected to be, (source: Farm Management Pocketbook), this means that the farm is going to receive a good price for its milk due to its excellent butterfat and protein levels. Sand is used in the cubicles of the milking cows instead of straw, this should help to reduce the chances of mastitis, the disadvantage of this is that sand will wear the cubicles faster; also the scraper cannot cope with large amounts of sand as it is too heavy. The sand is spread using a machine fitted to the front of a teleporter, 35 tonnes of sand is used a week, at a cost of £17.50 a tonne which is around the same cost as saw dust. The dairy system being operated on this farm is a high input high output system. Its is due to the large inputs that the farm is putting into the system that substantial outputs are being received, the diagram below shows the inputs into the farm how they are processed and the outputs that come from them: <table/>There are also 900 ewes on the farm, the flock is run for commercial purposes, although they are also used for research, the flock consists of Scottish Greyfaced ewes, and Texel sired lambs. The flock grazes the permanent grassland on the flood plains, as well as on cereal volunteers and on cattle grazing land in the winter to control the grass growth. The tupping date is fixed so that all the ewes lamb at Easter, the ewes are tupped with Texel and Suffolk rams. In June and July between three and four hundred of the lambs are sold, the rest go into store and are fattened through to January when they are then sold. The whole flock is managed by one worker. The research facility at the farm conducts applied and strategic research at the Centre for Dairy Research; the research department receives no university funding and is totally reliant on contracts. The work undertaken includes milk composition, nutrition, reproduction, health and the environmental impact of diary cows. The cows can all be individually fed using a gate system at the feeding troughs which will only allow the designated cow in. The animal production research unit looks at cattle and also other animals including sheep, goats, broilers and turkeys, with the research looking at improving carcass and meat quality. 