The Manydown Company is an estate located in the village of Wootton St Lawerance, near Basingstoke, it is made of three tenant farms, the main enterprises across the three farms are arable, beef and dairy. The estate is family owned, and the family along with a director make up the farm board. The board also has many top advisers who help to carefully manage the farm to ensure its survival for the next generation and only really interested in the long term plans of the farm. The director is responsible for implementing the family's plans for the farm. The farm then has eight workers who are involved in the daily running and operation of the farm. Although each person is employed due to a particular skill in a certain area they also work all over the farm and are never solely working on their enterprise, for example the arable staff work in the slaughter house once a week killing chickens. It is due to these workers being able to, and also being willing to work in many areas that this farm has become such a success. The estates mission is "To operate and effective country estate, supplying quality farm produce to the food industry. Caring for our staff, our animals, the environment, soils and buildings. Trying to maintain a long term future for everyone within the company. Providing a quality range of services, both commercial and charitable, to the local community." As can be seem from their mission statement, the management of the estate is very much based of preserving what they already have and working towards enhancing this. The public are also a major part of the farming policy, "to be the "preferred supplier"". The estate has set up a farm shop where it sells products grown on the farm and from local products. The shop was originally set up for the sale of beef but now sells many products and has been the reason for many introductions on the farm, including the chickens, pigs and Angus beef. There was a demand in the shop for quality Angus beef and the farm decided that it could meet the demand so introduced Aberdeen Angus cattle to the farm seven years ago. The chicken enterprise was also introduced due to a demand from the shop. The original supply of chickens to the farm was not of good quality so it was decided that chickens would be reared in a free range environment on the farm. The chicks arrive at a day old and are kept outside, after three weeks they are allowed to roam outside during the day. After ten to eleven weeks the birds weigh 2-2.5kg and are ready for slaughter at the onsite slaughter facility, after hanging the chickens are packaged and sold in the shop for £1.90 a pound. The slaughtering of the chickens is also based around customer demand; the chickens are killed on a Thursday, hung over the weekend and are then ready for the shop for Wednesday. This is because the biggest demand for chicken is on Wednesday through to Saturday. The farm also has a flock of 800 ewes, 100 of these are poll Dorset ewes, the rest are North Country Mules which are served by Hampshire or Texsel rams. The sheep enterprise is also set up to meet the demands of the shop. As the shop wishes to supply lamb all year round the farm has four lambing periods at Christmas, late February, April, and May. This ensures that there are lambs available all year round so the farm is able to supply its customers with the goods they want. The farm also has a herd of large black pigs which consists of 6 sows and 2 boars, each sow has 20 piglets a year in 2 litters they are weaned at 6 weeks, and are kept outside in grassed paddocks and fed on cereal based roll as well as foraging for themselves. They are slaughtered at 9 months; the pork is then used to make bacon, sausages and ham that are being sold through the farm shop. The pigs are proving to be a viable enterprise, while also helping to maintain the numbers of the breed which is listed as critical on the rare breed trust website. The breed was first introduced to the farm because there was a shop already in place to sell the meat, and also because it gives the shop an edge over its competition. The shop is able to advertise the fact that it has a rare breed of meat for sale that is not widely available, and hopefully then draw in more business. If there was not already a shop to sell it through or if the farm had no competition then the pigs probably wouldn't be kept. The farm shop is on the site of an old contractor business, which used to sell frozen beef as a side enterprise from a small shop. The shop now sells beef, lamb, free range chicken and pork all from the farm as well as other local produce such as pickles, cheeses and juices. In 2004 the shop was awarded Hampshire Meat Producer/Retailer of the Year; this has helped to draw customers to the shop. Manydown estate took over the shop in 1994 when it was making £50,000 per annum, the shop has since grown and has had three extensions and now makes £780,000 per annum with most weeks seeing 700 customers a week. Over the last 10 years the shop has managed to achieve growth of 10% per year, with word of mouth being the main advertiser, but the shop now needs to look at other ways to advertise itself to more people so it can continue growing. The reason the farm shop was first created was because the farm could no longer make as much money due to the increased supply and very small increase in demand which came about after the UK joined the EU, subsidies were used to help farmers but they were reduced in the 1990s and this meant farmers either had to diversify, expand, downsize or quit. Manydown decided that it would diversify, there were many options open to them such as use the land for forestry or leisure, rent out buildings for leisure or work, go into the agricultural inputs sector, or go in to the process and retail sector. They choose the retail sector and hence why there is now a farm shop. The shop and the farm have a close relationship that has meant that the farm can supply the shop with exactly what it needs, meaning that its customers are delivered with exact the products they want all year round in most cases. The shop is able to adapt quickly to customer demands as the shop has a direct link to its suppliers and can work with them to get exactly the products they want and often at short notice. This has meant that the shop has seen a growth in its customer numbers. 