<heading>Introduction</heading>This report is based on a hypothetical case study based around a Berkshire farm, the specification is given below: <quote>"You are the owner and manager for a 180 ha farm in the county of Berkshire. The basis of its farming activities has been milk production, and at one time over 300 cows were milked. Latterly the number of cows have been reduced, but it remains a dairy farm. In addition to the dairy cows, there are also some sheep and some cereal production. Staff include a dairy herdsman, tractor driver, and your 19 year old son, currently at university, who helps out during his vacation". </quote>In this report I have made the following assumptions; that the manager and two workers are not in a position where they will be retiring soon, and the son will be returning to work on the farm from university in the next year. The farm is owned outright and the manager is working on the land as well as carrying out office work. My final assumption is that the farm is in a financially secure situation but is looking to increase profits. This report covers five main areas of the business, these are: The roles of the manager, and how they link to management tasks In this section I will look at the technical, conceptual and human skills required by a manager in the agricultural sector, I will also describe the informational, interpersonal and decisional roles and how they link to the management tasks. The external environment that affects the business I shall identify the main aspects of the external environment and identify the main figures in the task environment. I will also use the PEST framework to examine other forces that affect the business. The stakeholders of the business are also identified in this section. The strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats of the business, and its goal over the next two years I will perform a SWOT analysis for the business, and use this to decide on a goal for the business to achieve over the next two years. I will then write a strategy for how the goal will be achieved and a statement on how the strategy will be implemented. The communication within the business This section explores the role of communication within the business, the types of communication and the problems with communication. The business financial, and organisational performance I will use this section to explain the differences between budgeting and financial analysis and why they are important to the business, and I will detail the types of analysis that can be used to measure financial and organisational performance. <heading>Section one</heading>A person in this position will need to fulfil all the management parts, as they will be the functional, general, line, staff and most probably the task manager although this type of management is unlikely to be needed on the farm. As the farm is self owned there is no one to report to, or whose requests and targets have to be meet, so it would be up to the manager to run the business on a daily basis and then to review the business on a regular basis and check that the management that is being implemented is being successful. The manger could delegate certain sectors of the farm to employees, such as having the herdsman responsible for the dairy unit, and he would then need to report to the manger as he would be the herdsman general and line manager, as well as his employer. The manager in this role would need to have many conceptual skills as they are responsible for the entire business, the conceptual skills needed are thinking, information processing, planning and decision making. The planning will be needed to effectively manage the crops and livestock, factors such as when to drill, apply fertilisers and chemical sprays and when harvest will take place. This will need to be planned to ensure there is the staff to carry out all the tasks, and that the materials are on site when the job needs to be carried out. The ability to process information is also important, what is grown and the livestock kept will depend on current and predicted prices so the ability to read the information on these issues is essential to choosing a profitable venture. The ability to make decisions will help with choosing what crops will be grown and what livestock keep and how much time should be spent on certain tasks, but these decisions can only be made in conjunction with the other conceptual skills of thinking about what tasks need to be done, planning them and processing information to make informed decisions. As the sole manager of the business the person in this role would need to lead the workforce, this will involve directing them on what work needs to be done and when and most probably leading by example as the manager of this business will probably also have to work on the farm. This is linked to communication, it is essential that the person in this role has good communication skills as they will need to set the goals of what is trying to be achieved by the work carried out, and they will also need to convey work and tasks to employees clearly, this is especially important in this working environment, as carrying out a task wrong can have very large consequences that may affect the survival of the business such as the spraying off, or cutting of the wrong crop. Other human skills will also be needed, such as the ability to co-ordinate, this will include the co-ordination of staff, the manager would have to ensure that he has the man power to carry out all the tasks and that the business is never under or over staffed, this may mean that extra workers will need to hired during busy times such as harvest. As the only manager, the person in this role would also be responsible for resolving any issues the workforce have, this could be difficult in this situation because it is such a small workforce the manager is likely to friends with all the employees, it will also be difficult if his son was involved and what have to act as though he had no connection to any of the employees. The person in this role would also need to be self motivated as they will have no one to motivate them, they would also be responsible for motivating the staff, so it is essential that they never loose sight of the end goal or it could end up affecting the workforce as well. The third management skill that would be needed by someone in this position is that of technical skill, this means having the ability to understand the work of the business and how it is carried out and be proficient in the skills required. In a farming business this is vitally important, as the manager will probably have to do manual labour as well as doing the office work. They are also most likely to be the main source of relief staff to cover the workers when they are ill or on holiday, it is therefore essential that they poses some basic knowledge of all the farming activities so that cover can be provided. The person in this position would be responsible for carrying out many informational, interpersonal and decisional roles due to the fact that they are the only manager and the owner of the business. The informational roles that will apply are, monitoring information, being able to find the information they need and read and understand it, this is relevant to this job as information on the industry will constantly need reviewing, such as the price of inputs and outputs, predicted changes in the industry and new techniques and technology that is developed that could increase efficiency. The farm accounts will also need reviewing regularly to check that the business is not going to make a loss, budgets will also need to be set and this will not be possible unless information is known on predicted price for inputs and outputs, and what new machines or equipment will need to be bought. The role of a disseminator is not particularly relevant to this role as it is a small business, and there is no owner to present too as the owner and manager are the same person. However if any information was to be told to the employees it what be the responsibility of this person. The role of spokesperson is the responsibility of the person in this role; they would be the one to represent the business to other companies and organisations. The person is the position will have to lead and liaise with people, these are the interpersonal roles. As the manager and owner the person would be responsible for directing and motivating the staff, and also motivating themselves, as the person has no boss there is no one to provide motivation for them, so they must provide themselves. Liaising with suppliers and buyers, and also possibly financial institutions would be the responsibility of the manager, using the information gathered while liaising with these people should help the person in this role to manage the business more effectively. The decisional roles the person in this role will have to make are very important as they will affect the success of the business and there is no one to over see the decisions or to liaise with on important issues, so the manager must be entrepreneurial to be able to spot and exploit opportunities in the market, or to see future threats and change the business so that it isn't caught out when the threat appears. They must also be able to deal with any problems and resolve them, whether this be staffing issues or unexpected supply or sale issues. The ability to allocate resources is also essential, the resources available have to allocated in a way that will maximize there returns. This is where a good business mind is needed and also the use of the informational roles will help to make these decisions. In this job the ability to negotiate will also be an important part of this job, if the person in this role can effectively negotiate then better prices may be obtained for inputs and outputs. Problems could also be resolved faster if the person is able to negotiate with the people involved. All these roles can be linked to the management tasks of production, marketing, financial and personal management. The following list shows which roles and tasks are linked: <list>Monitor- marketing, financialDisseminator - personnelSpokesperson - marketing, financialLeader - personnel, productionLiaison - marketing, financial Entrepreneurial - production, marketing, financial Disturbance handler - personnel, financial Resource locator- production, marketing, financial, personnel Negotiator - personnel, financial</list>As the manager of this farm I would have to cover many management roles as I am the only person in a managerial position in the business. As the manager I would be responsible for day to day running of the farm and implementing plans, as the owner I would have to review the business to check that the management that is taken place is effective. As the manager of this business I would need good conceptual skills to process information, plan and make decisions, I would also need good human skills to lead and motivate the workforce and to co-ordinate their work. The technical skills are also very important for this role as help may be required from me, but also so I know what I am asking my workforce to do and know if it is achievable. I would also have to represent the business and monitor the business in the internal and external environment. In the next section I will go on to look at home the business is affected by the external environment. <heading>Section two</heading>This business will be largely affected by the external environment, as it will determine what is farmed and how it is farmed. The external factors that influence the business fall into four main sectors; these are the political sector, the economic sector, the socio-cultural sector, and the technological sector. Within each sector there are many different factors that will affect the business is various ways, some of the main factors are set out below. <heading> Political - </heading><heading> Regulations: </heading>A farming business can be affected by regulations from four main areas; these are local regulations, national regulations, EU regulations and international regulations. These regulations will govern what can be grown and how it can be grown, these regulations are often very strict so have to be adhered to otherwise it could have severe consequences for the farmer and the business. <heading>Quotas: </heading>A quota will determine how much of a product a farmer can produce, if he produces over this quota he cannot guarantee that his product will be bought. This will dictate how the land is farmed and what production occurs. For example it is inefficient for the business to produce over its milk quota as we will be paying for the production but may not get a return on the product. <heading>Pressure groups : </heading>The pressure groups will affect what demand there is for certain products, for example if a large scale campaign was launched by a vegetarian group trying to promote vegetarianism then the demand for meat may fall affecting farmers prices and may meaning they have to change what is produced. Also the status of the business in the local and national community can be affected by pressure groups, if a farm is exposed as miss treating animals or using chemicals on crops that could endanger human health consumers are highly unlikely to buy from this source. <heading>Trade barriers: </heading>If trade barriers are established by either UK or International governments then it may affect the import of UK produce to other countries and therefore lower the demand for the product, and this will also lead to a decline in the price of the product. An example of this is the EU ban on UK beef exports which was established after the BSE crisis in the UK. This saw the UK beef exports fall from £1bn before the ban to £20m in 2004 during the time of the ban. <heading>Economics - </heading><heading>Imports: </heading>Imports into a country will affect the price of the home produced goods; if the import of goods is too high then the producers in the U.K. will end up with no market for their products. <heading>Purchasing power: </heading>The purchasing power of the consumers will affect what the business can produce. For example if the consumers have a low purchasing power then they will not be able to afford to purchase higher costing goods such as organic food or specialist food. <heading>Exchange rates: </heading>The exchange rate between countries will affect the price of the product and also the amount of import and export that occurs. For example businesses in Europe are more likely to trade to those who use the Euro as there is no need to exchange currency. <heading>Government: </heading>Most economic factors are shaped by government or EU policies <heading>Socio- cultural - </heading><heading> Religious beliefs: </heading>The beliefs of the consumers will affect what is produced and how the goods are produced. For example Halal meat which is consumed by Jews and Muslims and is killed in a specific way. <heading> Direct selling: </heading>Farmers markets and farm shops have become more popular as people become more aware of the impacts of buying food that has travelled hundreds of miles and are starting to buy more local products. There is also an increase in novelty shopping occurring, this means that more people want something different from their shopping experience and so visiting the farm shop or farmers market makes the shopping experience different and more enjoyable. <heading>Technological - </heading><heading> New machines and techniques: </heading>The development of new machines and techniques will help to make the farm more efficient, such as more precision farming that will increase farm yields. This will probably increase the profit of the business. <heading> G.M. food: </heading>The use of G.M. crops will most likely help to increase yields, and cut input costs. This will help the business as it will increase the profit that it is making. A stakeholder is an individual or group that is either within or outside the organisation that has a stake in the business. There are two types of stakeholders, they are primary and secondary, the primary stakeholders are directly affected by the business, secondary stakeholders are not directly affected by the business but have an interest in it. The primary stakeholders in this business are: The owner - they are looking for a return on their investment, in this situation if the business fails then the farmer is likely to lose everything The employees - they will want job security, job satisfaction, paying and benefits such as health care. They will also be looking for a safe environment to work in; this is a major factor on farms as they are a very dangerous work place. Suppliers - suppliers want to know that they will be paid for the products that they sell to the farm, as most sales are done on an invoice basis the stakeholders want the farm to succeed so they get paid. Customers - the customers are looking at the availability of the product and its quality. If availability or quality is low then customers are unlikely to return. The secondary stakeholders for this industry are: The government - the export value the farms produce affects the government and the economy, by producing goods to export the farm is helping to improve the economy. The farm is also creating jobs in the rural sector where there is a lack of employment; this is helping to reduce unemployment. The local community - the farm is providing jobs in the local community, it is also helping the local economy as it will use other local services. In conclusion the farm will be affected by four forces in the external environment; these are the political, economic, socio-cultural and technological. As the manager it would be my responsibility to ensure the business is able to survive the pressure each of these forces puts on the business. The primary stakeholders are all very important to the business and without them the business would not be able to exist, it is therefore essential they are kept happy, the business is also important to its secondary stakeholders as it helps the national and local economy. In the next section I will look at the other environment that affects the business, this is known as the internal environment. <heading>Section three</heading>As the manager of the farm it would be one of my tasks to asses the business in different environments and see how capable the business is to respond to the environment. The two environments that the business needs to be assed in are the external and internal environment. To do this a SWOT analysis can be carried out, this involves looking at the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats the business has. Diagram one shows some the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats the farm has, some of which are explored below. <figure/>The internal strengths and weaknesses of the business can be measured by reviewing how efficient the business is at using the resources available to it, the use of technology, the structure of the organisation and the people that work within the organisation. The farm has changed what it produces to make use of more resources, it has changed from being a solely dairy farm to a farm that has dairy, sheep and cereals, this means that the farm is spreading its risk as well, if one enterprise was to prove not viable then it could be shut down and the extra resources than allocated to the remaining enterprises. The farm is also making good use of technology as it uses up to date technology in the form of tractors and the parlour. The organisation is also structured well, as there are few employees there cannot be a large structure system, but they way it works with the dairy herdsman being responsible for the dairy herd and the tractor driver being responsible for the arable work, it means the manager has more time to concentrate on running the farm as a whole and looking at ways to increase its productivity and profits in the future. As the manager is also the owner it means that decisions can be made quickly and the interest of the owner will also be the interests of the manager which is the farms success, this is a major benefit of this type of organisation structure. Porters five forces are a measure of the external environment and how they can affect the business; they are used in a SWOT analysis along with the PEST factors that are detailed in the previous section. They can be used to asses the threats to the business which is part of the SWOT analysis. Porters five forces are: <list>existence of competitorsexistence of substitute products or servicesthe ability of new competition to enter the industrystrength of buyersstrength of suppliers</list>The farm would face competition from local farms, larger farms, imports, goods at lower prices, and higher quality goods. Local farms will be competing for the local contracts, if they can offer a better quality or cheaper good or more of the good then they may gain the contract, the farms needs to choose whether it is going to go into competition with the local farms or whether it would be the weaker farm in the market so it would be more beneficial to produce a different product. Larger farms will probably be producing products on a larger scale than this farm is able to so it is more likely to get contracts from big buyers such as supermarkets as all the produce can come from one location cutting down transport and logistics. To compete the farm could over a niche market good such as organic produce, or the farm could aim to compete with the larger farms by producing the same good at a superior quality. Imports are hard to compete against as they often able to produce goods a lot cheaper often due to cheaper labour costs. Exploiting niche markets could help to solve this problem, examples of how this could be done are setting up a farm shop or selling produce at farmers markets, these are also examples of the opportunities available to the farm. The farm should be able to effectively compete with the lower priced and higher quality goods that some farms may produce. Although one reason may be to high investment, it could also be due to a good farm system and if this farm were to adapt it should be able to produce goods to the same standards and therefore compete in the market. Substitute products in the farming industry are goods such as free range or organic products, they are almost identical to the other goods accept are produced in a different way which may be more appealing to some customers. The farm can compete by either joining this market or by producing high quality goods and low prices that will hopefully make customers buy them. It would be difficult for new competition to enter the agricultural industry as it requires a large amount of finance firstly to acquire the land and then to but the machinery and plant needed. To gain contracts can also be difficult as most buyers will stick with trusted suppliers, so it may take a long while for a new farm to find a consistent contract. The buyers in this situation have a large amount of strength; there are many farms which signify that there is a large amount of choice. If the farm is not producing high quality goods or is not fulfilling its contract then buyers can quite easily go elsewhere. The strength of the suppliers depends on which good is being bought, for small goods such as tools and small equipment there are many suppliers so the strength is with the buyer, in this case the farm. However for larger goods, such as a tractor, there is a large amount of choice before it is bought as there are many makes, but once it has been bought there are a limited number of suppliers for parts and spares so the strength is then with the supplier. The goal of the farm over the next two years is to be a farm that is making a profit and producing high quality goods. This will be done in a way that cares for the environment, employees and the local community while also providing food for the UK and international market. This will all be done using sustainable practises that will not exploit or damage the land, and the aim is to increase and improve the farming practices implemented. This goal can be shown to be realistic and achievable using the smart system, Specific, Measurable, Agreed, Realistic, and Time, this reviews the aim of the goal (S), how it can be measured (M), how agreeable it is (A), how realistic it is (R) and the time and resources it will take to carry it out (T). The smart system is set out below for this farm business: S - The aim of this goal is to increase profits and farm in a sustainable way. M - Both these goals are measurable; a monthly and yearly review will show how the profits have changed. A wildlife or species diversity review carried out once a year, or recording of wildlife sightings will show if the sustainable farming is helping to improve the wildlife numbers. A yearly soil examination will also see if the new techniques are helping to benefit the soil, one way of doing this is to carry out an earthworm survey. A - The workers should agree to these new aims and the new techniques that they bring as it will benefit them. There may be some initial concerns that the business will fail to make a profit and so they will therefore loose their job, but by talking with employees and explaining the benefits they should agreeable with the plans. It is essential that they do agree in a business like this as each worker is responsible for a whole enterprise on the farm, and if the lose motivation it will most likely result in the failure of that enterprise. R - These goals are realistic and can quite easily be achieved, it will require some additional work from the employees to learn the new regulations and techniques but it not an unattainable goal. T - The time limit for this goal is two years, by the end of these two years there should be some indication as to whether these goals are going to be successful, but it will probably take many years before it will be seen exactly how successful it will be. The advantages of these goals is that they can be carried out using current resources and staff and that additional workers are unlikely to be needed, accept the son who could return to the farm after university to run the sheep unit and help to expand this enterprise, increasing profits. The goal can be implemented by modifying the use of the current resources; the farm currently has dairy, cereal and sheep enterprises. The farm has always been a dairy farm and I believe it should stay this way, the farm already has a good dairying systems and a dairy herdsman so it makes sense to maintain this enterprise, to meet the goal of having more sustainable farming while also producing a profitable and quality product I believe the dairy enterprise should become organic. There will be no additional costs as the parlour system is already in place, all that will need changing is the grass system that is used as this will also have to become organic to supply the cows with food. There is likely to be increased costs from concentrates and a lower milk yield but this will be outweighed as the organic milk will fetch a higher price in the market as it is worth 26.5 pence per litre whereas conventional ilk is worth 18.5 pence per litre (farmers weekly interactive), the calves can also be kept and stored and then sold as organic beef, this will also fetch a high price. The sheep enterprise should also be changed to organic for three reasons, the higher prices that will be achieved for the meat, the increased benefit to the environment and also convenience. If both animal enterprises are operating organically it will make it easier for working and there won't be issues of the organic animals eating non-organic food or becoming infected with diseases that the non-organic animals have been vaccinated against. I don't believe that all the cereals should become organic as this has a high risk factor, in an idealistic state the whole farm would be able to become organic, but this increases the risk of a whole year's harvest being lost, and if this occurred it is unlikely the farm could recover. Some organic cereals should be grown as the grain will be needed to feed the animals, and the straw will be needed for bedding. These goals can be achieved by changing the current land on some areas of the farm into woodland or permanent pasture; this will help improve biodiversity on the farm and will be mean the land is no longer damaged by cultivations. These areas could be managed with the emphasis being towards environmental sustainability rather than agriculture; this could be done by reducing stocking rates on the land or by reducing the amount of time livestock is allowed on these areas. These changes will be implemented over the whole farm at the same time but it will need to be done in stages, the farm cannot change from being conventional to organic straight away, there is a transition period, and to start with none of the milk will be classed as organic so although the livestock being kept organically, the organic status will not be achieved until after nine months, but they may never be sold as organic cows, the calves that are born after the change to organic will be the fully organic generation. This will be the same with the lambs, it will be the second generation of lambs that are organic, the current stock can not be sold as organic as they have not eaten organic food for all of their life. The crops that are going to be grown organically will have to be kept separate from the conventional crops and it is important that they come into contact as this will cause their organic status to be lost. The organic status will take two years to obtain and in this time the crops grown on the conversion land will not have organic status, so the farm may be making a loss during this time but it will be recovered when the status is gained. To do this a cropping system will need to be developed so that all the organic crops can be harvested first, stored and preferably moved off the farm before the conventional crops are harvested. The SWOT analysis is used to measure the business strengths, weakness, opportunities and threats; it is used by using the PEST framework and Porters five forces. I have shown in this section that the business has many options available to overcome its threats and there are also many opportunities open to it. I have also set a goal for the farm that it can achieve in the next two years, and I have assed the goal using the SMART system and have shown how the goal will be implemented. This is linked to communication, which is explored in the next section, as the goal will have to be communicated to the workforce. <heading>Section four</heading>There are three functions of leadership; these are motivation, communication and encouraging teamwork. Communication is a vital part leadership as the ability to communicate will affect motivation and the success of the business. A manager will spend 80% of their time communicating this can be done through a variety of channels such as face to face conversations, over the telephone, via letters and emails, or through items on newsletters or on notice boards. Communication is a part of every function of management and without communication the manager would not be able to explain plans, share visions or implement changes. Communication as defined by Daft (2002) is "the process by which information is exchanged and understood by two or more people, usually with the intention to motivate or influence behaviour". This means that communication is more than just a manager talking to employees and telling them what is expected, it is about interaction and the sharing of information and ideas. Managers need to interact with the employees as this will give them a better idea of the state of the business and how it can be improved. The ability to affectively communicate is a difficult skill to master, many times people end up conveying the wrong message to people, whether this be at work or in our every day lives. The communication process is made of five parts: encode, message, channel, decode, and feedback. The sender of a message encodes a messages sends it via a channel such as letter or email, the receiver then decodes the message and then delivers feedback. It is during encoding and decoding that mistakes in what is being communicated can occur, the knowledge, attitude and background of the receiver maybe different to that of the sender so they may interpret the message in a different way. There are many ways of communicating within an organisation and each one is used to convey different information, it is important that the manger selects the right type to use in the situation. The commutations can be found on a scale that runs from low media richness an example of this is reports to high media richness which is face to face talks. Low media rich channels should be used for information that is already agreed or understood, or when a record of what is said is needed. Media rich sources should be used when the message is likely to be misunderstood, or when a quick response is needed, media rich sources are also more personal. Communication is not solely about talking, listening is also a key part and without it communication is not taking place as 75% of effective communication is listening, but most are unable to does this, so mistakes in communication occur. There are 10 key skills that are essential to listening, these are: <list>listen activelyfind areas of interestresist distractionscapitalise on thought being faster than speechbe responsivejudge content, not deliveryhold one's firelisten for ideaswork at listeningexercise one's mind</list>A good listener is able to do all of these and therefore understand and engage with the speaker, the definition of a good listener in Daft (2002) is someone who "finds areas of interest, is flexible, works hard at listening, and uses thought speed to mentally summarise, weigh, and anticipate what the speaker says". There are barriers to communication that can cause messages to become distorted; they exist in two areas; individual barriers and organisational barriers. In each there are several barriers that have to be overcome, they are shown below: Individual Interpersonal - problems with peoples emotions and perceptions Media - using the wrong channel to communicate with employees can lead to confusion and mixed messages. Semantics - this means understanding the meaning of words and how they are used. Different words may mean different things to people. Inconsistent cues- the verbal and nonverbal communications need to be the same so that confusion does not occur. Organisational Status or power differences - low level workers may be unwilling to pass up bad news creating a false image of the business. Also high status workers may ignore low level employees thinking they have nothing to contribute Different needs and goals - each department will have different needs and goals, the departments to work together and compromise for the benefit of the business. Lack of formal channels - without formal channels of communication the organisation cannot communicate effectively and therefore cannot operate at its best. Unsuited communication flow - if wrong communication channels are used then there maybe insufficient information provided, similarly it is a bad use of resources to use media rich channels for low level information. Poor coordination - departments may become isolated, or management will not know what is happening in each department. This means the organisation is not operating as a whole as is therefore not working at its best. Communication at the farm is very important as without it work may not be completed or tasks maybe carried out the wrong way, this will all lead to a lack in motivation. As each enterprise is being run by one person it is important that their views are listened to and that they have input into how the business is run, they are the ones that are running the enterprise every day so they therefore know it the best. By listening to the workers it can improve the farming techniques that are used which will help to increase the profits of the business. At the farm it is best, and probably most practical to use, media rich channels to communicate, the manager is likely to see the employees every day so can talk to them in formal and informal settings about his ideas and the ideas of his workers. The telephone is really the only alternative method on the farm as the workers will be carrying out practical work most of the time so will be unable to regularly check emails or read letters or memos. A notice board can be used for less important information but this will probably need following up with a personal meeting. The barriers to communication at the farm are, +Problems with people's perception of how tasks should be carried out or how systems should be run; everyone needs to agree to make the business work +Using inappropriate channels to communicate with employees what work needs to be one, could lead to mistakes +Difference in knowledge, the son will have learnt about agriculture today and in the future, whereas the manager and workers may be more inclined to stick with traditional practises and not listen to new ideas +The workers may be afraid to report mistakes or failings to the manager; this will mean that the manager assumes his business is working fine when really it may be struggling +The different enterprises need to work together so that they all benefit, if they all just work for their own benefits then the business will suffer +If the different enterprises do not know what each other is doing then opportunities could be missed, or extra expense laid out Communication is a vital part of the business, and without it the business would not be able to operate. There are many ways to communicate as I have shown in this section so it is vital that the correct method is used to communicate or it could cause problems and misunderstanding. On the farm that can be many barriers to communication one of the main ones being different peoples knowledge or techniques for carrying out work. It is essential that everyone understands each other so the business can work as a unit. <heading>Section five</heading>Budgetary control and financial control are both used as management controls, the definition of budgetary control is "the process of setting targets for an organisations expenditures, monitoring results and comparing them to the budget, and making changes as needed" (Daft, 2002). This means that the budget is used as a report to monitor planned and actual expenditures, they are used to look at costs, assets, investments and salaries, the budget will often set out expected costs and then actual costs so a comparison can easily be made between the two. Financial control is used to monitor the financial performance of an organisation using financial statements; they tell managers where the organisation stands financially and indicate possible future problems. The definition of a financial statement is "the basic information used for financial control of an organisation" (Daft, 2002). Financial analysis is linked to financial control; once finical statements have been prepared they need to be interpreted. This can mean comparing the organisations performance with previous years or with competitors or industry leaders. By creating these comparisons it allows the organisation to see if it is improving and how competitive it is. When carrying out budgeting analysis there are four different budgets that can be used, these are expense budgets, revenue budgets, cash budgets and capital budgets. The expense budget is used to look at anticipated and actual expenses, for each department and for the organisation as a whole. It can show all types of expenses or just focus on particular expenses such as research. The revenue budget lists the revenue that was forecasted and then the actual revenue received. If the revenues comes in below the expected amount then it means investigation is needed, investigation may also be needed if it is higher than expected. Cash budgets "estimates the receipts and expenditures on a daily or weekly basis to ensure that an organisation has sufficient cash to meet its obligations" (Daft, 2002). If the budget show the organisation has an excess then it may be able to invest to earn interest, if it is going to be low then arrangements have to be made to borrow money. Capital budget records investment plans that will be long lasting, often over a year, for assets such as plant and buildings. They will have great effect on future budgets, but will hopefully they will cause a rise in profits, if not then the investments are probably not worth while. The reason the cash budget is necessary is "to plan the impact of these expenditures on cash flow and profitability" (Daft, 2002). There are three measures that can be used to carry out financial analysis these are the balance sheet, this shows the organisations financial situation at a specific point in time. It is concerned with the assets the organisation has and the liabilities it has. It gives three pieces of information, assets, liabilities and owner's equity. The second financial measure is the profit and loss account; this shows the wealth created by a business in a given period of time. On the profit and loss account there is information on revenues and expenses, which includes tax and depreciation. At the bottom there is the net income, this is the profit or loss for the given time. The third measure is the cash flow statement; this has details of receipts and payments, its shows when money will be coming into the organisation and when it will be going out. Other techniques that can be used to measure and control the organisational performance are the TQM (total quality management) techniques. Some of the techniques are listed below: Quality circles - this is a group of between 6 and 12 volunteers who meet to help solve problems that affect the quality of their work. It is an ongoing process and meetings are usually held once a week. The members of the group may use existing data or they may collect their own. The idea of a quality circle is that the people who are doing the job can have an input to how it can be improved. This technique would not really work on the farm due to the low number of employees; the manager could operate an open communication system where employees feel confident to express their ideas on task and how to improve them. Benchmarking - the definition of benchmarking is "the continuous process of measuring products, services, and practices against major competitors or industry leaders" (Daft, 2002). It is important that the company is honest with its self when it analysis itself, and that it picks a company with a similar goal and mission statement. The farm would be able to use this type of analysis, as it could compare itself to successful local or national farms. Continuous improvement - this is the approach of changing a little bit constantly rather large scale changes infrequently. This type of change has the highest probability of success as it is a never ending system so the company can adjust to markets and demand in small stages. This method of control can be used on the farm as each worker can improve how they do their job and run their enterprise over time, this will mean that the farm will not have large costs at once, and it should also keep them at the front of their industry. Quality standards are also a way of measuring the performance of the business, an international example is the quality assurance scheme called ISO 9000. This is a set of standards that are created by the International Organisation for Standardisation, it is a globally recognised certificate that many businesses require and organisation to have before they will enter into business with them. An agricultural example of quality standard schemes are the Quality Assurance Schemes that operate for all sectors of the industry such as the Assured British Meat, who's aim is "To maintain and develop credible Standards within the red meat industry covering food safety, animal welfare and environmental protection and to promote integrated beef and lamb assurance to provide consumers and retailers with confidence about product safety" (ABM, date unknown). By complying with these standards the farm can be sure it is producing the highest quality meat as only the best will be allowed to enter the scheme. Another form of assessing a business performance is to take into account finances, markets, customers and employees so that the whole of the business can be evaluated rather than just the financial sector. An example of this method is the balance scorecard which is shown in diagram two. The balance scorecard looks at four key areas, financial performance, customer service, internal business processes, and the capacity to learn and grow. The farm can use this to view how its activities affect financial performance, how the farm is viewed by customers and its potential to gain more employees, how the farm operates and if it is meeting orders and costs, and the potential the farm has to improve and grow, this is mainly focussed towards employee development for the future. The son is an example of the development of an employee, by sending him to university he will gain a better understanding of modern agriculture and can then input his knowledge to the farm, and then one day take over being competent for the job due to previous investment from the farm in his education. <figure/> FORMULA  A business needs to carry out analysis to establish where it stands compared to its competitors; it is done using a budget and financial analysis. The budget analysis is used to set out expected expenditures and then to review what actually happens, it is done using four budgets these are expense, revenue, cash and capital budgets. Financial analysis looks at the businesses financial performance; this is done using three methods, the balance sheet, the profit and loss account and the cash flow statement. Other ways a business can analysis it self is by organisational analysis using TQM techniques such as benchmarking, and by using industry and quality standards. <heading>Conclusion</heading>In section one I set out to look at the roles the manager of this farm must perform and the technical, conceptual, and human skills that they must have. I have shown that the manager must be able to fill all the roles of management as he is the only one in a management position in the business. The owner and manager of this business is the same person so they must manage the farm on a daily basis and also review their management looking at it the eyes of the owner and implement changes that are necessary. The manager also needs good technical, conceptual, and human skills in order to process information, make decisions, and plan how they will be implemented. Also to lead, motivate, co-ordinate the workforce and to have knowledge of the work being carried out so assistance can be offered and proper planning can be achieved. In this section I also looked at the informational, interpersonal and decisional roles that apply to the manager and how these link to the management tasks of production, marketing, financial and personal management. To be able to find, understand, and use information is an important skill for the management, it relates to the financial side because it is important they are able to interpret financial accounts and important for production to ensure the farm is up to date with the latest techniques and is aware of the machines available to it. To have good interpersonal skills is essential as the manager will have to deal with employees as well as the external environment, he will have to be able to motivate the staff, while also be a spokesperson for the farm and liaise with customers and suppliers. As this is a small farm business having an entrepreneurial manager is a distinctive advantage as it means they will be able to exploit opportunities in the market and increase profits, this is part of the decisional roles that the manger must perform, which as I have shown in this section are a vital part of the skills the manger in this position must have. Section two looked at the main aspects of the external environment using the PEST framework, from this I was able to show that the farm will be influenced by every sector of the PEST framework, some of which have more detrimental affects than others, but all can ever be over come or worked around so that the business can continue to make a profit. This section also contained the main stakeholders, the main ones to the farm are the owner, the employees, the suppliers, and the customers they all have a very high interest in the business although it is only the owner who has high amounts of power. The farm is also important to the local and national economy as it provides jobs and brings money to the country and also to the local community. The SWOT analysis was used in section three; this used the PEST framework from the previous section as well as Porters 5 forces to create an image of the business internal and external environment. This section should that the business does have several threats mainly in the form of larger and local farms and from imports, but I have shown how these can be overcome but entering into niche markets such as organic, or to start new enterprises such as farm shops. I decided on a goal for the farm over the next two years, which was to become an organic farm. I have then used the SMART system to show that this is achievable; I then showed how the farm will change to an organic farm over a period of time which is mainly determined by the Soil Association. In section four communication within the business was examined, why it was important, the types used and problems that could occur. I showed how important communication is and how it is more than just talking; I showed how it is a vital part of the farm business but is often a difficult thing to get right. I showed the ways that could be used to communicate and explained why the face to face method would be the best to use on the farm. I showed the importance of using the correct delivery method when communicating and how it can cause problems if the incorrect method is used, I also listed the other barriers that occur and why. Section five was concerned with budgeting and financial analysis; I demonstrated how they are both important to a business so that it is able to analysis its financial state. I showed the types of analysis that could be used and what each one showed, and how it was useful to the business. I then looked at the organisational analysis that could be used to compare the business to industry leaders and competition, and how other areas of the business can be monitored other than just finance. 