<heading>1.0 Introduction:</heading><heading>1.1 Compression Ignition vs. Spark Ignition:</heading>A Petters ACI four-stroke diesel engine is used. The four-stroke cycle, as it suggests, consists of four stages; air intake, compression, fuel injection & combustion and exhaust. Unlike the petrol four-stroke cycle that compresses a fuel and air mixture, the diesel cycle compresses only the air. The heat from this compression ignites the diesel upon injection, rather than providing a spark to ignite the fuel as in a petrol engine. For this reason a diesel engine has a higher compression ratio than a petrol engine, as high as 25:1 compared to 12:1 of a petrol engine. This higher compression ratio also enables the diesel engine to have a higher efficiency than a petrol engine. <heading>1.2 The Diesel Cycle:</heading>Figure 1 shows a graphical representation of the processes that occur during the Diesel cycle. Notice how heat addition occurs at constant pressure instead of constant volume as in the Otto cycle. <figure/>1 2 Air compressed isentropically through compression ratio  FORMULA  2 3 Heat is added while the air expands at constant pressure to volume V 3. At state 3 the heat supply is cut off and the volume ratio V 3/V 2 is called the cut-off ratio r C. 3 4 The air is expanded isentropically to the original volume. 4 1 Heat is rejected at constant volume until the cycle is complete. <heading>1.3 Experimental Procedure:</heading>Mineral Diesel and Bio-Diesel were used as fuels for this engine. The Bio-Diesel in this case was Rape Methyl Ester (RME). In order to compare the effectiveness of each fuel, a number of measurements were taken. These measurements were then used to calculate some parameters that indicate the level of performance of the engine. The engine was run at a constant speed throughout the experiment by adjusting the throttle control. The table below shows the running speed. <table/>On a few of the graphs one of the results was over-looked as it was deemed to be anomalous. This can be seen from Graph 24 (Appendix 2) where the second point of time taken for 20ml of fuel consumption at 3N load on the engine was too low. The recorded time was 103 seconds when it should have been more in the region of 118 seconds. This inaccuracy was most probably down to observer vigilance. A table of the measured and calculated data can be found in Appendix 1. <heading>2.0 Data Measurement & Calculation:</heading><heading>2.1 Oscilloscope Read-Outs:</heading>The indicated power is the sum of the brake power and the friction power. It can be obtained through a process of measuring the pressure and volume inside the cylinder. Graph 1 (Page 5) shows the different stages of the four-stroke cycle: <list>Points 1 2, Air intakePoints 2 3, Compression of airPoints 3 4, CombustionPoints 4 1, Exhaust</list>The larger area of the diagram represents the useful work done by the engine (compression and combustion) and the small region represents the work lost from the intake of air and exhaust of gases. The total integral of this graph equals the total work done. The indicated power equals the total work done per cycle multiplied by the number of cycles per second. Graphs 4-15 (Appendix 3) show the p-V diagrams for a range of loads with the engine running on mineral and bio diesel. Notice the area under the graph gets bigger for bigger loads. Graph 16 (Appendix 3) shows a general upwards trend of indicated power against load for both fuels. This correlates with the analytical calculation of indicated power shown in Appendix 1. and Graph 17 (Page 6). <heading>2.2 Indicated, Brake and Friction Power:</heading>Graph 17 shows that as the load on the engine increased the brake power increased. The friction power was assumed to be constant over the applied load range for each fuel therefore the indicated power increased at the same rate as the brake power, (I.P. = B.P. + F.P.). Graph 18 (Page 7) shows that, as the brake power increased the fuel consumption increased. This was true for both the fuels, however the bio-diesel fuel consumption rate was greater than the mineral diesel. This is because the bio-diesel has a lower L.C.V. than the mineral diesel. By extrapolating the graphs back to the x-axis the intercept gave the friction power (aka friction loss) within the engine. The friction power within the engine for mineral diesel was 1.7kW and 1.5kW for bio-diesel. These friction powers are shown on Graph 17 represented within the indicated power. The reason that mineral diesel had more frictional losses than the bio-diesel is because bio-diesel has better lubricating properties. <heading>2.3 Fuel Consumption & Air/Fuel Ratio:</heading>Graph 19 (Page 8) shows that for lower B.M.E.P.'s (loads) relatively more fuel is required than at higher B.M.E.P.'s. This is because it takes x amount of fuel to 'turn' the engine and x to turn it with a bit more force. Both fuels followed the same trend but the bio-diesel used more fuel in doing so. This again is because of the relatively low L.C.V. of bio-diesel. The air fuel ratio decreased as the B.M.E.P. increased (Graph 20, Page 9). This is because more fuel was required to drive the engine at higher B.M.E.P.'s while the air intake remained approximately constant. <heading>2.4 Energy Balance & Usage Throughout the System:</heading>Air cooling losses increased linearly with B.M.E.P. (Graph 21, Page 10). This was because, as more fuel was being burnt more heat was being produced. The bio-diesel gave more air cooling losses because more energy was being supplied (see dashed lines on graph). Graph 22 (Page 11) shows the energy usage throughout the system as a % of the heat supplied by the fuel. The vast majority of the supplied heat was wasted in the exhaust, air cooling and other energy losses (other losses included noise, vibration etc.). This was very similar for both fuels. This wastage of energy is expressed in the efficiencies as discussed below. <heading>2.5 Engine Efficiencies:</heading>Graph 23 (Page 12) shows the brake thermal, indicated thermal and mechanical efficiencies of the engine running on both fuels. The mechanical efficiencies for both the mineral and bio-diesel rose from zero to approximately 70% over their full working range. The bio-diesel constantly had a slightly better efficiency, about 2%, over its entire range. However the bio-diesel couldn't work under as high a load as the mineral diesel. The reason for bio-diesel having a better mechanical efficiency is because of its better lubricating properties, not as much energy was used to overcome the friction within the engine. The indicated thermal efficiency for both fuels was very similar reaching a maximum of approximately 20% with the mineral diesel being slightly higher over the complete range (about 4-6% higher). Both fuels started to decrease at their maximum working loads. Mineral diesel had an overall higher indicated efficiency because this efficiency measure ignores the mechanical (frictional) losses within the engine. So because mineral diesel had a higher friction power (thus used more of the supplied energy to drive the engine) it also had a higher indicated efficiency. The brake thermal efficiency of both fuels was almost identical up to about 300kPa of B.M.E.P. where the mineral diesel continued to rise and the bio-diesel levelled off. Both fuels rose from zero percent at 0kPa with mineral diesel hitting a peak of 23% and bio-diesel 19% both at approximately 500kPa. The reason for mineral diesel having a slightly better efficiency is because it converted a higher % of the heat supplied into brake power. <heading>3.0 Conclusions:</heading>Overall bio-diesel performed very well compared to mineral diesel. Positives for bio-diesel were its lower friction power due to its superior lubricating properties and its higher levels of mechanical efficiency. On the down side it could not perform at high levels of load and it had a lower indicated thermal efficiency. However indicated thermal efficiency is not a very useful gauge of performance as it ignores mechanical losses. Where brake thermal efficiency was concerned it performed to just about an equal level as mineral diesel. With all the above points in mind and the environmental benefits of bio-diesel it could substitute for mineral diesel as a transport fuel very well. 