Objectives: To develop an understanding of the principles underlying the freezing processes. To be able to estimate the freezing time for a particular type of freezer. <heading>Introduction</heading>Refrigeration can be described as the term covering 2 areas of processes, chilling and freezing in which both two processes involve the lowering and maintenance of the temperature below an ambient temperature. Chilling involves no phase changes of the water and thus only sensible heat is removed in the process. In freezing, this process includes the transformation of the water in their liquid phase into solid, so incorporate both sensible heat and latent heat removal. For this reason freezing always comes along with more energy expenditure and time to complete the operation (Pardo and Niranjan, 2006). Two most common ways of attaining the low temperature are the mechanical refrigeration system and the use of cryogenic fluids (Pardo and Niranjan, 2006). The mechanical refrigeration cycle comprises of 5 components i.e. the evaporator (low-temperature heat exchanger), compressor, condenser (high-temperature heat exchanger), the expansion valve and the refrigerant. Heat from the food will be transferred to the evaporator by the temperature gradient resulting in the evaporation of the refrigerant. Then the compressor will caused the gaseous refrigerant to change into a superheated gas. After that, the passing of this high energy refrigerant through the condenser will lead to the condensation of the refrigerant back into the liquid phase. Next, the liquefied refrigerant will enter the expansion valve, which is a high/low pressure separator, leading to the pressure drop. Consequently, a mixture of liquid and gas refrigerant is formed. Finally, this mixture will participate in the evaporator and the cycle continues. Pardo and Niranjan (2006) catagorised refrigeration into 4 systems. First, the Plate Contact system in which the food is placed in direct contact with a cold surface e.g. a plate freezer where a refrigerant is circulating within the plate providing the temperature difference so the heat is transfer from the food to the colder surfaces. Second, the Gas Contact refrigerator, the cooling of the food is achieved by the circulation or the flow of cold gas (usually air) through the food and absorbing heat from it. Example of such system is air blast refrigerator. This procedure can also be incorporated with vacuum cooling where reduction in pressure will cause the water to vaporize, carrying with it the latent heat thus leading to the lowering in temperature. Third, Immersion or Liquid Contact refrigeration where an food is made into contact with the cold liquid e.g. water, brines or ethylene glycol by spraying or immersion. By this means, the food (often unpacked) can rapidly attain the temperature of the cold liquid. Fourth, Cryogenic freezing; this involves the direct contact of the food with the low boiling point liquid, for instance; liquid nitrogen (-196 °C) or liquid carbon dioxide (-78.5°C). Low temperature is produced by the phase change (boiling) of the cryogenic liquid at the atmospheric pressure, so this process is a total loss system since the refrigerant is discharged into the atmosphere (Boast, 1985). Consequently, it is the most expensive system of all. The first three system mentioned above can be used either to chill or freeze the food while the last method, cryogenic system, can only be used in freezing process due to the difficulty in controlling the final temperature of the food. Freezing process can be divided into 4 steps (Boegh-Soerensen and Jul, 1985); (i) Prefreezing stage where the temperature of the food is reduced to its freezing point but ice crystal has yet to form. (ii) Supercooling stage, this is characterized by the further drop of the temperature below its freezing point without any ice formation. (iii) Freezing stage, starts when the temperature increases back to its freezing point and water-ice transformation takes place. This stage exhibit constant temperature until all water is crystallised i.e. completely change into ice. (iv) Subfreezing stage, the further decreases in temperature of the food to the end temperature or the intended storage temperature. This process occurs relatively fast due to the lower specific heat of ice compared to that of water and that no latent heat is being removed. Most foods have to pass through a preliminary process prior to being refrigerated. Two methods used are blanching and sulphiting. Blanching can be done by either steam or hot water. The purposes of this method are to heat inactivate enzymes e.g. polyphenol oxidase which would otherwise cause product deterioration during storage i.e. enzymatic browning reaction. Moreover, the reduction of microbial contamination and chemical contamination e.g. pesticide residue have also been reported. Sulphiting is the application of sulphur dioxide (SO2) or inorganic sulphites (SO3 2-) in order to reduce both enzymic and nonenzymic browning reaction, microbial growth and as an reducing agent or antioxidant leading to a better characteristics of food (Grandison, 2006). <heading>Method</heading><list>1. Blanching and sulphiting.Cut vegetables (sprouts, mushroom, potato, carrot) into smaller pieces in equal size.Blanching condition was 90°C.The imitated hard water was prepared using calcium chloride solution.Divide similar amount and types of cut vegetables into 7 set of experiment i.e.control: no further treatment blanched in soft water for 2 minutesblanched in soft water for 5 minutesblanched in imitated hard water for 2 minutesblanched in imitated hard water for 5 minutesimmersion in 0.1 % sodium metabisulphite for 5 minutesimmersion in 0.5 % sodium metabisulphite for 5 minutesby put into 7 different aluminium trays and label the tray.Performed the experiment according to each condition.After completed each set of condition, compared processed vegetables in each set of experiment with the control ones in terms of the inactivation of enzymes i.e. catalase (by added a few drops of hydrogen peroxide) and polyphenol oxidase (by added a few drops of guaiacol). Look for the carbon dioxide formation and brown colour development, respectively.All sets of experiment were transferred to plate freezer.2. Blast freezingPut each of the following : apple, tomato and potato into an aluminium tray and put into a blast freezer at -18°C for 60 minutesMeasured the temperature at the center.3. Vacuum chillingCut 2 tomatoes into halves i.e. 4 pieces of half tomatoes and put in an aluminium tray.Measured the over all weight and temperature at the center.After the vacuum chilling was run for 10 minutes, the weight and the temperature at the center were recorded.4. Freezing using liquid nitrogenUsing potato, tomato and apple as a whole fruit. Measuring the center temperature of the fruits.Immersed in liquid nitrogen for one minute.Temperature at the center was measured and compared with that before processed.5. Plate freezer: continued from blanching and sulphiting.All 7 aluminium trays from blanching and sulphiting were transferred to the plate freezer (-30 °C) for 30 minutes.6. Extra: to illustrate that the food is a poor conduction of heat.Choose two different size apples i.e. one smaller and one bigger. Both apples were blanched at 90 °C for 5 minutesTemperatures at the center were compared.7. Make an estimation of the freezing time for tomatoes having diameter of 4 cm by liquid nitrogen and air blast freezer by Plank's equation.</list><heading>Results </heading><table/><table/><table/><table/><table/>No further experiment was performed. <table/>When cut, it was found that the there was a development of layers within both fruits. 7. Utilizing the Plank's equation, we can estimate the freezing time as follows;  FORMULA  For tomatoes diameter of 4 cm By liquid nitrogen where  FORMULA  by substitute the above values in the equation, the estimated freezing time for tomatoes having diameter of 4 cm using liquid nitrogen would be between 13.50 to 62.35 seconds depending on the extent of heat film coefficient (h). By air blast where  FORMULA  by substitute the above value in the same equation, the estimated freezing time for tomatoes size ~4 cm using air blast freezer would be between 23 to 67 minutes depending on the extent of the heat film coefficient (h). <heading>Discussion</heading>From table 1, we could see the effects of blanching on the enzymes activity. Normally catalase cause no deterioration to the food during storage (Fellows, 2000) but it is used as a marker because their relatively resistant to heat i.e. the absence of catalase could indicate the likelihood of other enzymes' absence as well. Polyphenol oxidase cause browning of the food stuffs during storage of the freezing or dehydration products by transforming the polyphenol compounds existing abundant in the fruits into brown-coloured substances. The presence of catalase can be detected by air bubble formation following the addition of hydrogen peroxide since hydrogen peroxide is broken into water and oxygen molecule. Detection of polyphenol oxidase is demonstrated by the brown colour formation after the addition of the substrate for the reaction i.e. guaiacol. In both soft water and imitated hard water, the longer the blanching time, the larger the extent of enzymes inactivation. This could probably explained by the nature of the enzymes; that is the longer exposure to heat, the more inactivation they would get. Calcium chloride added to the blanching medium is the reason for better texture retention of the fruits and vegetables after blanching due to the development of calcium pectate within the plant tissue (Grandison, 2006). As blanching applies relatively mild heat treatment compared to other heat treatment methods (e.g. pasteurization), most of the spores would still survive the process. Sulphiting controls browning reaction by inhibition of POP so lowering the amount participated in enzymic browning. In addition, it binds with reducing sugar (formyl group containing compound) preventing them from binding with amino group in nonenzymic browning (Maillard reaction). Plate freezer is a freezing method where temperature gradient takes the heat from the food to the cooler metallic plate which made into direct contact with the food. Thus, in the plate freezer, the main heat transfer mechanism would be the conduction process from metallic surface to the food; hence heat removal could be enhanced by the closer contact between the metallic slab and food. In cold air freezing, i.e. air blast, the air is circulated in the chamber containing food and as doing so it absorbs the heat from the food. Both convection and conduction processes occur in cold air freezer i.e. convection between the food and the cold air and conduction within the food pieces. The blast-freezer gave quite similar results in all three fruits. The highest temperature in tomatoes after processed (0 °C) could be attributed to its water content being the highest among the three fruits used. No layer development was seen in all fruits. In liquid nitrogen, it was clear that 1 minute immersion was not enough to uniformly freeze them as the temperature between the surface and thermal center of each fruit was significantly different i.e. more than 10 °C. Consequently, using liquid nitrogen for large food will result in the prolonged contact time which means the more lost of the expensive liquid nitrogen. These results illustrated the draw back of freezing large food by liquid nitrogen. However, cryogenic freezing can be coupled with air contact freezing for a better result e.g. first producing a 'cold hard crust' material by the cryogenic freezing then it is transferred to the cold chamber to finish off the solidification process (Pardo and Niranjan, 2006). Because vacuum chilling lower the temperature of the food by losing some of its energy in the form of latent heat during evaporation, the final weight of the product were less than that of the fresh produce. From the experiment, it was found that a number of general factors affecting the cooling of the food i.e. the temperature difference between the refrigerant and the food, the size of the food pieces and the nature of the food. For temperature gradient; the higher, the better since more rapid lose of heat to the refrigerant could be achieved as can be seen from the lower temperature at the surface of potato from liquid nitrogen (-14 °C) and blast freezing ( -1 °C). Because foods act as poor heat conduction medium as illustrated in the last part of the experiment, the smaller in size leads to faster freezing time. This is clearly demonstrated in the freezing by liquid nitrogen. Water content is one example of the nature of the food which could affect the rate of cooling of food i.e. the more water exist, the longer it would take to freeze them all. In air blast system the higher velocity of the circulating air decreases the thickness of boundary film surrounding the food (Fellows, 2000) thus increases the rate of heat transfer. The longer contact time between food and the freezing agent results in lower final temperature of the food. <heading>Freezing time and freezing rate .</heading>Freezing time can be defined in several ways follow Boegh-Soerensen and Jul (1985); First definition: it is 'the time required to lower the temperature of the product from its initial temperature to a given temperature (normally -10 °C) at the center'. Second definition is 'the time from surface reaching 0 °C to the center reaching -10 °C'. However, it is not very useful to compare freezing time between the products vastly different in size e.g. the large pieces of beef and peas. For this reason, the freezing rate comes in. It is defined as the average velocity of ice front advancing from the surface to the center of the food i.e. the ratio between the minimum distances from the surface to the thermal center (cm) and the freezing time (hour) using the second definition. An advantage of commercial freezing over home freezing is the capability of regeneration. The heat or energy in refrigerant acquired from the food can be recycled e.g. use to generate heat for the rest of the factory/building. Moreover, the freezing chambers are normally a large with the sole purpose of freezing while home freezing is usually done by a small frozen chamber mostly with vertical loading/access facilities (Boast, 1985). As a result, the opening of the door in home freezing will cause the loss of cold air out and is replaced by warm air, leading to the formation of frost which hinders the heat transfer mechanism on the freezing surfaces. The more important is that in commercial freezing, the foods put inside the freezer each time are of the same condition e.g. same size, temperature whereas in the home freezing people put in different things in different time. This could impair the already frozen food due to the rising of temperature. In another word, more fluctuation in temperature is experienced by foods in the home freezing mode. 