When speaking of spore many will think of the fungal spores which cause bread to become fluffy. But another kind of spore that is quite more interesting is the endospores. They are produced inside particular kinds of bacteria. This spore is different from the fungal spore in that it is not a means of reproduction. Unlike fungi, bacteria will only produce only single endospore and die, leaving the endospore waiting for another chance to grow. The generation of endospore and there components are quite interesting and significantly complicates the food industry. The formation of endospore is called the sporulation, after such period the spore will remain dormant until further activated, causing germination and outgrowth. Sporulation occurs when environmental conditions are unfavourable for the growth of the vegetative cells e.g. the nutrients deprivation or the extreme environment. The process starts when the stationary phase of the microbial growth is reached and takes about 8 hours to complete (Dahl, 2000). It begins with the inhibition of cell division by external signals followed by signal transduction within the cell and then the asymmetrical partitioning of the septum. The 7 indistinct steps of sporulation based on the cytological changes detailed by Setlow and Johnson (2001) and Gould (2000) and Dahl (2000) could be summarized as follow. First, the appearance of asymmetrical septation in the mother cell gives rise to 2 unequal-sized cells (the smaller, called forespore, will later become endospore), then the engulfment of the larger compartment around the smaller one results in the 2 membraned-forespore which has the unique back-to-font middle membrane and is believed to be responsible for the control of molecules into the protoplasm of the endospore. Dehydration starts, lessening the pH by 1 and the dormancy begins. The generation of the peptidoglycan layer called cortex between inner and outer membrane along with the synthesis of Spore-specific Acid Soluble Proteins (SASPs) and accumulation of Ca 2+ and Dipicolinic acid (DPA) of more or less 10% dry weight basis of forespore in the core occur simultaneously with the dehydration process. After the cortex is synthesized, the deposition of spore coat protein on the surface of the outer forespore (back-to-front membrane) begins. The transformation of the forespore into an endospore is believed to be induced by the specific transcription of the gene in the forespore which occur by the communication between mother cell and forespore via signal transfer across the septum. This process results in the production of autolysin, releasing the forespore out while mother cell lyses and dies. The resulting endospores are varying in shape and position relative to mother cell e.g. lateral, central or terminal. The endospore consists of a number of layers which can be outlined as: the core - membrane - cortex -- reversed polarity membrane (back-to-front) - coat - exosporium. The innermost part, the core or protoplast, this lowest water content layer contains DNA, ribosome, enzymes, calcium dipicolinate (DPA-Ca) and SASPs' pool which binds to and stabilizes the DNA. The next layer is the inner membrane which inhibits the passing through of substance MW> 150. Cortex, as stated, is a peptidoglycan layer but different from vegetative cells in that it contains only 65% muramic acid, lacking peptide residues and has lower degree of cross-linking. It also involves in the dehydration process of the core and contributes to spore's resistance as well. The back-to-front membrane being slightly different in the protein composition from the inner membrane will protect the influx of the small molecule into the deeper part of the spore. The disulfide bridges-containing coat serves as a protective barrier from lytic enzyme, pH extremes and oxidizing agents (Garbutt, 1997) but not to heat and irradiation and finally the thin covering layer known as exosporium. Apart from the differences in their physical appearance from their vegetative cell counterparts, the biochemical discrepancy are, for instances, the SASPs are found only in the endospore whereas the enzymes for amino acid or nucleotide synthesis are absent, high amounts of 3-phosphoglyceric acid in endospore and scarcely found the high energy compound i.e. deoxynucleotide triphosphate and the different protein founded at the DNA. After they became endospore (released from the mother cell), there is hardly any metabolism but it is believed that there are 2 enzyme-substrate pairs responsible for the first few reaction during germination, ready and waiting for the right condition to start their reaction (Gould, 2000). This means that they must have the ability to detect suitable environmental conditions to start their growth once again. Such processes are the activation and germination (~25 minutes after activation). Within a few minutes, the returning of nutrients such as L-alanine, glucose or mineral ion such as K+ or the sublethal heating i.e. the heating that cause no death to the microorganism or the chemicals such as long chain alkyl monoamine, lyzozyme or even pressure lower than 400 MPa (Patterson, 2000) could initiate the activation process. Mechanism for nutrients activation is believed to be that they change the series of enzyme action by binding to the endospore receptors, causing peptidoglycan cleavage so water moves into the core, swelling it. In addition, the excretion of stabilizing factors e.g. Ca-DPA and hydrolysis of SASPs also occurs. Eventually, endospore starts to metabolize and lost their resistance properties. The final stage before transform to fully vegetative cell is the outgrowth which takes around 90 minutes to complete (Setlow and Johnson, 2001). Unlike germination, this stage needs exogenous nutrients for their increasing synthesis and growth. By the end of the outgrowth, the endospore will have reclaimed the ability to synthesize amino acids and nucleotides. However, the endospore partial lysis and the shedding of their coating during this stage lead to the susceptibility of the bacteria to food preservatives (Gould, 2000). Such example is the use of bacteriocin nisin in cheese or canned food which inhibit the microorganism immediately after they have germinated. The significance of the endospores in the food industry lies in their extreme resistance to adverse conditions. Generally speaking, their resistances are mainly due to the dehydrated state of the core (15% water compared to 75% in vegetative cell); meaning less water is available in reaction. At low water content, the protein denaturation is less likely to occur and the depurination of DNA is prevented by the stabilizing action of SASPs to DNA with the ratio of 1 SASPs to 5 base pairs (Gould, 2000), and to a lesser extent, the impermeability of their various membranes. Freezing has no effect on them since the DNA damage is prevented by SASPs. They can withstand a hydrostatic pressure up to 1200 MPa (Adams and Moss, 2000). γ-ray resistance is second only to the virus but the precise mechanism is not known, possibly from the different DNA environment compared to vegetative cell. Their UV-ray resistant at 254 nm, a maximum lethality, is 5-7 times greater than their vegetative cell due to the DNA stabilizing effect of SASPs. Exposed to various chemical species e.g. oxidizing agents, phenol, pH extreme has little effect on them because the inhibitory effect of their coat on the influx of the molecule into the core. In addition, the low water content in the core help in reducing damage from H 2O 2 by refrain the production of •OH from Fenton chemistry (Setlow and Johnson, 2001). Their extreme heat resistances pose major problems in the food industry since heating is the widely used approach to control microorganisms. The combination of the intrinsic heat resistance (inherited from their vegetative cell) and the additional resistance from the mechanism in the spores (add ~ 40 -50 °C more) contribute to their extreme resilient to thermal processing (Gould, 2000). Again, the low water content in the protoplast is likely to be the main cause for the resistance. Moreover, conditions during heating i.e. low a w , low Equilibrium Relative Humidity (ERH) and high Ca 2+ all contribute to the higher resistance. The higher sporulation temperature also gives rise to higher endospore heat resistance (Leuschner, 2003). Many survived after being heated at 100 °C for several minutes. Unfortunately, most sporeformer is capable of producing toxin and cause food poisoning which can range from mild e.g. Bacillus subtilis, to severe e.g. Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringen to life threatening e.g. Clostridium botulinum (Gould, 2000) and many lead to the spoilage of the food. For example, the flat sour food spoilage of low acid (pH>4.6) canned food e.g. canned peas, beans products by Bacillus stearothermophilus, which produce the most heat tolerant endospore. The contamination of endospores can occur in the raw materials or ingredients used. During heating, the endospore can be activated and multiply at high temperature region e.g. holding tank blanchers or warm filter bowls (Kotzekidou, 2000) whereas the vegetative cells might form endospores that could germinate later during the improper transportation and storage. These complication leads to the necessity for controlling the endospore population in raw material and ingredients as well as the rapid cooling after heating process and low temperature (<43 °C) during transportation and storage of the products to minimize the germination of endospores thus lower the rate of food spoilage. Although many sporeformers can cause food poisoning in human, the 3 notorious species are Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium botulinum (Setlow and Johnson, 2001). In B. cereus, their endospores can survive spray-drying process so they are found widely in raw milk and dry foodstuffs (Batt, 2000) such as starches, spices and also in infant formulas (due to dried-milk powder) and can cause food poisoning. To prevent the germination of endospores, the cooked food must be rapidly cooled down to 7°C or maintain at >60 °C. The most pathogenic heat resistance spore of C. botulinum makes it the target for heating processes in canned food. Their spores germinate in anaerobic condition so the canning methods have to ensure the adequate inactivation of this microbe to prevent toxin production by the germinating spores. The mesophilic C. perfringens presents a problem in food service establishments, e.g. hospitals, prisons (Penfield and Campbell, 1990) because the generation of toxins during sporulation due to an unfavorable conditions for their growth in our intestines. To prevent the intoxication the mass production of cooked food has to be rapidly cooled down and thoroughly heated. To reduce the incidents of food spoilage and poisoning, it is important to monitor the raw material to limit endospore load, adequate heat processing and rapid cooling of the processed food to adequately inactivate the endospores. Always make sure that your food is thoroughly cooked before serving and reheated every time before consumption. 