<heading>Introduction</heading>This report describes the findings of a series of experiments using a simple climate model. The model was provided in the form of an Excel spreadsheet and allows the user to specify radiative forcings and climate feedback parameters. The model uses the specified parameters to calculate global mean temperature anomalies, and compares these values with observed anomalies for the period 1850 - 2006. Any figures or tables referred to may be found in the Appendices. <heading>Part A</heading>The spreadsheet model was used to attempt to identify those radiative forcings, or combination of forcings responsible for the observed temperature changes since 1850, assuming a mid-range climate feedback parameter of 1.3 Wm -2K -1. The model allows individual forcing mechanisms to be turned on or off, and calculates the cumulative forcing and the resulting surface temperature change. The predicted surface temperature anomaly was qualitatively compared with the observed temperature anomaly from 1850-1879 by means of graphs, and qualitatively compared in terms of the χ2 error. By only turning the well mixed greenhouse gases (GHG) forcing on, it can be seen that the model predicts a positive radiative forcing, and subsequent temperature rise (figure A1). However, the predicted temperature rise only consistently matches the observed temperatures in the early part of the record (1850-1890). This may be partly due to the large error in the early observations. After about 1890, the model is systematically overestimating the observed temperatures. Throughout the observational record, high frequency fluctuations are present which are not captured by the model. This would suggest that the radiative forcing attributable to GHGs is being somewhat offset by other forcing mechanisms, some of which are working on shorter timescales to cause short-term variation in the historic record. However, the general trend of rising temperatures in the GHG only model matches the overall trend in the observations. The χ2 error of 501.72 should therefore be improved upon by the inclusion of other forcings. The model shows a better fit with the observations when all anthropogenic forcings are turned on (figure A2), with the χ2 error reduced to 330.01. This confirms the above suggestion that some forcings are apparently negative, thus offsetting the warming of the GHG only scenario. It is interesting to note that the omission of the aerosol indirect effect improves the χ2 error, reducing the value to 217.71 (figure A3). It would seem that the importance of the aerosol indirect effect was initially overestimated, hence the reduction in the error resulting from its omission. This version of the model still does not seem to reflect short-term oscillations in the observation record, such as the cooling events of 1855-60, 1880-95, 1900-1910 and 1940-50 and subsequent recoveries. It therefore seems likely that these events were the result of some natural process, or an anthropogenic mechanism not considered by the model. The error should therefore be further minimised by incorporating such forcings. The natural forcings considered in the model have a cooling effect (figure A4). Examination of each of the natural mechanisms reveals that volcanic forcing is the dominant of the two natural mechanisms. Cooling resulting from volcanic forcing is unique, in that the cooling effect is sudden, typically occurring over a period of 4-5 years whilst the recovery tends to be more gradual (~10 years). Several large volcanic eruptions may be identified within the model, most notably those of Krakatoa (1883), Agung (1963), El Chichon (1982) and Mount Pinatubo (1991). However, by only considering the natural forcings, the model considerably underestimates the observed temperature anomalies, predicting a generally stable global mean surface temperature, with frequent cooling events. This is emphasised by the relatively high value of χ2 (2319.02). This suggests that natural forcings alone are unlikely to be responsible for the observed warming trend, although natural forcings may contribute to the high frequency variations in the observed data. When all forcings are switched on, the model shows a reasonable fit with the observations (figure A5). For much of the period under consideration, the model predicts temperature anomalies within the range of instrumental error. The most notable departures of the model from the observed data seem to be associated with the large volcanic events noted previously, for which the model consistently overestimates the associated cooling effect. It is likely that it is this sensitivity of the model to volcanic events that has caused the relatively high value of χ2. It is interesting to note that the model consistently underestimates the observed temperature anomaly since about 1960. Overall, it would appear that the general warming trend since 1850 is driven by anthropogenic radiative forcings, since these produce the smallest errors when compared with observations. Large volcanic eruptions tend to reduce the global temperatures, although in the latter half of the 20 th century such events seem to merely slow the rate of warming in the observed data rather than to induce a period of cooling. The effects of such events are seemingly overestimated by the model. <heading>Part B</heading>This section will explore the effect of the uncertainty in the climate feedback parameter, Y. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimate the value of this parameter to lie within the range 0.8 - 3.3 Wm -2K -1. To simplify the investigation, an arbitrary radiative forcing mechanism was considered. This forcing was taken to be non-existent before 1900, and constant since 1900, simulating a step-change in radiative forcing, and consequently a step-change in the equilibrium temperature (the new "stable" temperature resulting from a given forcing). The response of the model temperatures is compared to the change in the equilibrium temperature for differing values of Y. At the lowest value of Y, the response of the model is slow, only reaching about a third of the equilibrium temperature within 5 years (figure B1). The response curve then stabilises and only predicts a temperature rise of about two-thirds after 100 years. At the upper end of the range of Y the equilibrium temperature is lower, and the model responds more rapidly, although the equilibrium temperature is still not reached (figure B2). Therefore, the climate feedback parameter determines both the magnitude and speed of climate response. A lower value results in a slower response, but a greater temperature change over time (figure B1). Higher values result in quicker responses, but generally lesser temperature changes (figure B2). The uncertainty in Y therefore has implications for assessing the observed temperature rises. If the true value of Y lies at the upper end of the range of uncertainty, then it is likely that much of the warming due to anthropogenic forcing has already occurred owing to the rapid response of the climate system. If this forcing can be reduced then global temperatures may stabilise relatively quickly. However, if Y lies at the lower end of the range of uncertainty, then the climate system may not yet have fully responded to anthropogenic forcing and the trend of rising temperatures will continue. In this scenario, warming is likely to continue even if anthropogenic forcing is reduced due to the slower response time of the climate system. Reducing the uncertainty in Y is therefore an important area of research, as this will determine the response characteristics of the climate system to radiative forcing and reduce the uncertainty in predicted future trends. Improved scientific confidence in predictions may better facilitate the formulation and implementation of appropriate mitigation strategies. <heading>Part C</heading>This section includes a hypothetical forcing arising from stratospheric water vapour changes. This effect is assumed to be negligible prior to 1960, but increases linearly from 1960 (by 0.013 Wm -2 Yr -1), rising to a maximum of 0.6 Wm -2 in 2006. The climate feedback parameter was set at the mid-range value assumed in Part A (1.3 Wm -2K -1). As comparison of figures C1 and A5 shows, the inclusion of the proposed additional forcing improves the fit between model and observations, bringing the model temperature anomalies within the range of observational error by the end of the observed time period. This improvement is quantified by the reduction in the χ2 error to 726.78 (compared with the all-forcing value of 1025.54 noted in figure A5). This demonstrates that additional forcings may be shown to be physically consistent with observed data. However, this should not be regarded as proof that a particular forcing mechanism exists in reality. If such forcings are shown to be consistent with the observations, they should be further investigated so as to establish whether they are present within the climate system and behave as anticipated by the model. The effects can then be incorporated into climate models, thus reducing the uncertainties inherent within models regarding relevant forcing mechanisms and therefore future climate predictions. <heading>Part D</heading>In this section, the values of the climate feedback parameter and the scaling of each forcing were altered so as to minimise the χ2 error. This was attempted by adhering to the published uncertainty in scaling factors according to the IPCC Third Assessment Report (TAR), and by not adhering to the published uncertainties. The methodology adopted builds upon the findings of Part A. The fit of the model temperatures to the observations was improved by the appropriate adjustment of specific scaling factors and the climate feedback parameter. For example, it was noted in Part A that the model demonstrated a particular sensitivity to volcanic forcing, thus the scaling of this mechanism was reduced so as to minimise the resulting χ2 error. There was an element of trial and error involved in this methodology as it was necessary to 'home in' on the optimum scaling values for each forcing mechanism. Table D1 shows the final values of the scaling factors and the resulting χ2 errors. Using the published uncertainty estimates, an error of 125.69 was achieved. As may be observed in figure D1, the model is still overly sensitive to the effects of volcanic eruptions, despite this scaling being set to its minimum estimated value. Solar forcing was also set to a minimum, and the relatively small error obtained therefore suggests that anthropogenic forcing has a strong influence over the observed changes, thereby supporting the IPCC stance. This result is not wholly unexpected, since it is the IPCC uncertainty estimates that were used to constrain the scaling factors. The model performs relatively poorly in the early part of the 20 th Century, and this may be due to the underestimation of the scaling factor for any of the forcings, although such an error could not be identified. If this realisation of the model were to be accepted as accurately representing the climate system, GHGs, tropospheric ozone and soot aerosols would be the most important forcings responsible for the observed temperature changes. A modest improvement in the error value (93.94) was achieved by not constraining the scaling factors according to the TAR recommendations, resulting in a slightly smoother fit to the observed data (figure D2). There are some notable contrasts between some of the scaling factors in these two realisations of the model (Table D1). For example, volcanic forcing has been reduced considerably below its TAR-estimated minimum and organic carbon aerosols have no associated radiative forcing. The dominant forcings now appear to be stratospheric and tropospheric ozone, biomass burning, indirect aerosols, solar variability and GHGs. Whilst this remains consistent with the IPCC stance on dominant anthropogenic forcing, the situation has become more complex since there is a greater range of forcing mechanisms at work, in a more sensitive climate. This makes the attribution of observed climate change a more difficult task, and some uncertainty therefore has to be accepted as a trade-off for quantifying the relative importance of the most likely radiative forcing mechanisms. <heading>Conclusions</heading>This report has demonstrated some of the difficulties inherent in accurately attributing observed global temperature trends to specific causes. Whilst models based on scientific knowledge permit some investigation of the attribution issue, there are limitations relating to the uncertainty estimates of the controlling parameters as well as to the ability of models to accurately capture all atmospheric processes. Any apparent agreement between modelled and observed data should always be investigated in order to understand any specific atmospheric phenomena causing the correlation, thus avoiding uncertainty arising from spurious conjecture based solely on model output. 