<abstract><heading>1. Abstract</heading>A platinum film thermometer and a thermistor thermometer were calibrated over the range 0°C - 50°C so as to quantify their response characteristics and associated errors. The sensitivity and resolution of each instrument was calculated and these were used to compare the instruments. Recommendations are made as to the suitability of these instruments for meteorological applications. </abstract><heading>2. Introduction</heading>Thermometry involves measuring and quantifying the temperature of a medium. Thermometers are based upon the principle of measuring a known physical quantity that varies with temperature. Resistance thermometers measure the change in electrical resistance of an electrical conductor. The relationship between resistance and temperature can be mathematically quantified. Thus, if the resistance of a given material is known, the temperature can be calculated (DeFelice, 1998; Met Office, 1981; Strangeways, 2003). Many metals exhibit such behaviour, for example nickel, iron and copper. Platinum is commonly used in resistance thermometers owing to its ability to maintain its characteristics over a long period, resistance to corrosion and relative linearity in response. These factors help minimise deterioration in the instruments' performance over time and allow for a simple calculation to determine temperature from the recorded resistance (Met Office, 1981; Strangeways, 2003). The response characteristic of platinum resistance thermometers is accurately approximated by  FORMULA  where R is resistance (Ω) at temperature T (°C), R 0 is resistance (Ω) at standard temperature T 0 (taken as 0°C) and α and β are constants characteristic of the instrument (in °C -1). Over the atmospheric range of temperature, the quadratic term in equation (1) is much smaller than the linear term. Therefore, an accurate meteorological approximation to the characteristic is given by  FORMULA  where R is resistance (Ω) at temperature T (°C), R 0 is the resistance at 0°C and b= R 0α ( Ω°C -1) (DeFelice, 1998; Met Office, 1981; Strangeways, 2003). Thermistors are an alternative type of resistance thermometer. These are semiconductor resistors that display a larger change in resistance with temperature than metals. This change in resistance may be either positive or negative. Thermistor sensors can be engineered to be very small, thus lowering the thermal capacity and time-constant. The characteristic of thermistors can be expressed as  FORMULA  where R is thermistor resistance (Ω) at temperature T (K), A is the characteristic resistance (Ω) and B is the characteristic temperature (K). It should be noted that this is not a perfect fit and that the error may be up to 5% of the actual resistance. It follows that this equation may be simplified to give the linear relationship  FORMULA  (DeFelice, 1998; Met Office, 1981; Strangeways, 2003). This paper describes the calibration of a platinum film resistance thermometer and a thermistor thermometer over the range 0°C to 50°C (273.15 K to 323.15 K). The values of all constants in equations 1 to 4 will be determined for the instruments used, and the calibration errors quantified. The characteristics of the instruments will then be compared. <heading>3. Experimental Method</heading>The platinum film resistance thermometer (PFT) and thermistor thermometer were immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. A precision platinum resistance thermometer was also immersed in the bath, and was used to record the 'actual' temperature of the water, required for calibrating the other two thermometers. The PFT and thermistor thermometer were each connected to individual multi-meters, which displayed the resistance of the respective instruments. The resolutions of the multi-meters differed, with the meter connected to the platinum film thermometer having a resolution of 0.001 Ω, and the meter connected to the thermistor thermometer having a resolution of 1 Ω. The temperature of the water bath was raised from 0°C to 50°C in approximately 5°C intervals. Resistance was recorded for the PFT and thermistor thermometer when the precision thermometer indicated that the water temperature was relatively stable (i.e. varying by only approximately 0.01°C s -1). Resistance readings were taken simultaneously for both thermometers so as to avoid errors arising from differing lag characteristics <heading>4. Results</heading>The results arising from the experiment are shown in Appendix 1. <heading>4.1 Basic Analysis</heading>Resistance was plotted against temperature for both thermometers. Figure 1 shows the resulting characteristics for the platinum film thermometer. Error bars were not plotted as errors were in the order of 10 -3 Ω, and would thus not appear on the scale used in figure 1. <figure/>As described in section 1, a linear relationship exists. Using ordinary least squares regression, the constants R 0, b and α (equation 2) were estimated as follows:  FORMULA  where the quoted errors represent 2 standard errors of the mean. Figure 2 shows the response of the thermistor thermometer. Again, error bars have not been plotted owing to their small order of magnitude (1 Ω) relative to the plotted scale. <figure/>Thus the values of b and ln (A) (equation 4) were calculated as:  FORMULA  Therefore:  FORMULA  (quoted errors represent 2 standard errors of the mean) These values were used in equation 3 to produce estimated values of R at 1°C intervals between 0°C and 50°C. These estimates were then plotted alongside the observed data as shown in figure 3 The observed data in figure 3 shows a close correlation with the fitted data, being within the 5% error margin expected. This is not surprising, since the fitted data was derived using the calibration data arising from the observations, but figure 3 at least confirms that the estimated values are within acceptable ranges. <figure/><heading>4.2 Further Analysis</heading>The resistance values for the platinum resistance thermometer determined by using equation 2 were subtracted from the observed resistance values recorded in Appendix 1. The resulting residuals are plotted in figure 4. The linear residuals show a marked variation, especially at either end of the experimental temperature range. Therefore the response characteristic predicted by the linear relationship (equation 2) could be improved upon so as to increase the precision of the instrument. This was investigated by fitting a quadratic equation (R = -5x10 -5T 2 + 0.3899T + 100.39) to the observed values. The residuals generated by this method are also plotted on figure 4. <figure/>The quadratic residuals seem to reduce the variability of the predicted resistance relative to the observed resistance. The quadratic readings are also generally consistent, in that they tend to slightly underestimate the actual data. Whilst the residuals are relatively small in both the linear and quadratic cases, the improvement in accuracy gained by using the quadratic equation may prove important in precision thermometry within the temperature range 0°C - 50°C. The sensitivity of the thermometers is given by the differentials of the relationships described in equations 1, 2 and 3 (the gradients of any plotted response characteristic). In the case of the platinum film thermometer, this is relatively easy to calculate. It is slightly more complicated for the thermistor thermometer. The derivations are detailed below  FORMULA  Using these equations, the sensitivity of each instrument was calculated. For the platinum film thermometer, the sensitivity was derived by both the linear and quadratic methods for comparison. The resolution of each thermometer was then calculated, assuming that the resolution of the digital meters used in the experiment (see section 3) was the only limiting factor. Table 1 summarises these results. <table/>Both thermometers show very high resolutions. The thermistor shows the best resolutions, especially at lower temperatures. The resolution of the thermistor appears to approach that of the platinum film thermometer as temperature increases. The use of the quadratic equation for the platinum film resistor has a minimal effect in improving the resolution when compared with the linear equation. So as to assess the measurement accuracy of the thermometers, consider the uncertainty on the recorded value of resistance. Assuming a systematic uncertainty associated with the resistance (dR) of ±0.1%, the corresponding uncertainty associated with the measured value of temperature (dT) can be derived using the resolution of the instrument (in °C Ω-1) and the definition of resolution (resolution = dT/dR). The range of uncertainty on temperature was thus calculated for both thermometers at 20°C, and found to be:  FORMULA  Therefore the platinum film thermometer can be said to have the superior measurement accuracy at 20°C. The calibration errors are also of smaller magnitudes for the platinum film thermometer (of orders of 10 -4 and 10 -2) than for the thermistor thermometer (orders of 10 1 and10 -2). If measurement accuracy were the most important consideration, then the platinum film thermometer would appear to be the instrument of choice, as smaller calibration errors will equate to lower uncertainty values. <heading>5. Discussion</heading>The calibration of the platinum film thermometer and thermistor allowed the relationships between temperature and resistance to be quantified for each instrument. These were:  FORMULA  Investigation of the linear relationship for the platinum film thermometer revealed that the use of a quadratic equation (R = -5x10 -5T 2 + 0.3899T + 100.39) better approximated the observed response of the instrument. The improvement in the range of accuracy was shown to be in the order of 0.01°C through the use of the quadratic equation. Whilst this is likely to be of minimal importance for most atmospheric applications, it may be of use in high-precision thermometry and therefore should be noted. Both thermometers were shown to have a high sensitivity relative to the resolutions of the digital meters used to measure resistance. Thus either instrument will respond to a small change in environmental temperature with a detectable change in the resistance of the sensor. It should be noted that in the case of the thermistor, the sensitivity of the instrument is not constant, and actually deteriorates with increasing temperature as a result of the response characteristic. However, the sensitivity is still sufficiently high at 30°C for the thermistor thermometer to be comparable with the platinum film thermometer. The resolution of each thermometer was also calculated, assuming that instrument resolution was only limited by that of the multi-meter used in the calibration. The thermistor displayed the highest resolution, although this also deteriorated at higher temperatures, tending towards the constant resolution of the platinum film thermometer. A brief investigation of the measured temperature uncertainty related to a known resistance uncertainty was undertaken. This revealed that the platinum film thermometer had a smaller temperature uncertainty than the thermistor. The platinum film thermometer also had lower calibration errors than the thermistor. Overall, it would therefore be more desirable to use the platinum film thermometer for meteorological measurements. This instrument has a relatively accurate linear relationship between resistance and temperature, which can be improved upon by use of a quadratic relationship if necessary. Other aspects of the platinum film thermometer are relatively constant, such as the sensitivity and resistance, and show little reliance on temperature (in the quadratic case), or none (in the linear case), unlike the thermistor, for which these characteristics decline with increasing temperature. Also, smaller calibration errors associated with the platinum film thermometer mean that more accurate results are likely when compared with the thermistor. It would be wise to repeat this calibration experiment over several runs so as to determine the typical responses of each instrument. Also recommended for future investigation is an increase of the experimental temperature range so as to determine the operating ranges of each instrument and if either instrument demonstrates better accuracy than the other within certain temperature ranges. 