<heading>1. Introduction</heading><heading>1.1 Definition of 'literacy'</heading>It is a difficult challenge to provide a unique and exhaustive definition of the term 'literacy' since many different studies reflecting a variety of theories and models have been conducted in the second part of the last century. We can divide works into two traditions, the 'narrow' and the 'broad' (Williams, 2004). The former one explores literacy from a psychological point of view, focusing on the individual and their development of initial reading and writing skills. The latter, on the other hand, combines sociological and anthropological approaches, examining and evaluating literacy practices in social contexts. From the 1980s onward, a gradual change in position has taken place, shifting from the traditional notion of basic reading and writing to context-specific communication and critical thinking skills. More specifically, literacy is increasingly defined as the set of skills, knowledge and social practices that young people and adults use to perceive the world around them and to achieve personal and social goals. <heading>1.2 What is this study about? </heading>In the essay, I will discuss literacy practices of children attending the primary school in a small village in Italy in the second part of the 1980s (see appendix 1), describing different activities inside and outside the classroom according to both the narrow and the broad tradition. The aim of the study is to describe the complex system of literacy practices in the primary school and to underline the importance of the family and the community for the development of children's literacy skills. <heading>2. Literacy in the classroom</heading><heading>2.1 The National Curriculum</heading>According to the National Curriculum the activities in primary schools are divided into two parts: in the first two years of education children concentrate on learning how to read, write and calculate, in order to gain sufficient confidence to master more complex texts and topics; in the last three years subjects like grammar, science, geography, history and geometry are introduced. Furthermore, additional disciplines like 'physical education', 'education to sound and music' and 'education to images' were introduced in 1985 and became part of the curriculum as compulsory subjects in 1987, after being considered the Cinderellas of primary school for many years (Massenz, 2004). Finally, religion is taught weekly in the 'religion hour' (appendix 2). <heading>2.2 The role of the teacher</heading>The teacher plays a fundamental role in the classroom; she is the mediator of literacy, the expert whom children rely upon. Her duty is to create "a genuine literacy workshop" (Meek, 1990: 149), providing positive invitations, demonstrations, information and explanations that fit their understanding. The transition from the nursery to primary school is not abrupt. The teacher introduces children to literacy through recreational activities, including songs, rhymes and story telling. The atmosphere of teaching is relaxed and informal, although the respective roles of teacher and learners are well defined and not negotiable. Discipline is recognized as an important matter. Teachers also play a key role in establishing profitable links between school and home, involving parents' close collaboration. Parents are encouraged to become involved with their children's reading and writing, in the form of hearing them read, engaging in one-to-one interactions that elicit the discussion of the text (shared reading), providing writing opportunities related to the domestic life (short notes, shopping lists, compiling phone and address books entries etc.). It is important to establish a continuity among literacy practices in the classroom and within the family, since home activities have been largely recognized as beneficial for children's literacy skills development (Hannon, 1995). <heading>2.3 Learning to read</heading>The first important step in early literacy is the acquisition of the alphabet principle (i.e. the sound-letter correspondence). Italian is a rather easy language from this point of view, since it has a good sound-spelling correspondence (technically 'orthographically shallow'). The phonic approach to alphabet (Campbell, 1995) involves the learning of the names of the letters and their sounds, which are both taught in isolation and as a combination of vowel and consonant. Thus, the notion of syllable is also introduced and children gradually learn to recognize words as strings of phonemes put one after the other. This practice is highly structured and children learn through repetition of single words, whose syllables are beaten by claps of hands. They also receive other inputs, like written words (sound-letter correspondence) and pictures (sound-meaning correspondence). After a few days the phonics approach is substituted by another approach to reading which involves the actual reading of 'real books' (Campbell, 1995). According to many experts in literacy analysis, this is a more effective strategy for the development of literacy skills in children and it does not prevent the teaching of phonics, which occurs incidentally and arises naturally out of the material being read (Schonell, 1961; Goodman, 1986). Real books are predictable and meaningful, they are written with natural language. Through them teachers can emphasize forward-moving narrative with logical connections and consequences. They also present texts imparting knowledge about the author, explaining the reasons of the choice; they involve children in guessing activities about the content of the text and try to relate it to the readers' real life and experiences. Gregory and Williams (2000) define this approach as 'modelling' strategies and underline how it enables children to interpret texts and the world around them, especially in communities that share the same cultural background. Complementary to the 'modelling' approach are 'scaffolding' strategies, which aim "to help the child decode the text and are directly based on the text itself" (Gregory and Williams, 2000: 190). They can be applied both in individual reading (teacher and child dyad) and in group reading, giving children "an excellent opportunity to scaffold each other's learning by providing answers, by correcting each other, allowing repetitions as well as echoing" (Gregory and Williams, 2000: 197). <heading>2.4 Learning to write</heading>In her work, Tolchinsky (1998) points out the regularities in children's writing development, describing four different stages: an undifferentiated and unconstrained series of signs ('scribbles'); a formally constrained writing, containing a limited number and a certain variety of letters; a syllabic period in which there is a term-to-term correspondence between syllables and written elements; and eventually an alphabetic stage, with a clear awareness of letters-phonemes correspondence. The author also claims that "the acquisition of writing appears as a natural, endogenous driven construction [since] nobody taught these principles to the child" (Tolchinsky, 1998: 285). As we have seen, in reading skills development children's first approach to written language occurs through phonics teaching, children being exposed to written words and to their pronunciations. The identification of grapheme-phoneme relations seems to be the main strategy as far as writing is concerned, while global strategy, which involves the recognition of words as a whole without paying attention to letters, does not play any role in the acquisition of spelling (Goswami and Bryant, 1990). An additional strategy is the teaching of spelling rules, especially for those words which are an exception in the regular orthography of the language (e.g. homophones, digraphs, graphic accents and apostrophes). The main problem with these words is that learners cannot rely on their knowledge of the phonetics of the language. The spelling in these cases is mainly based on grammatical concepts (e.g. word classes), which children of this age can only difficultly cope with. The teacher usually tackles these issues through rhymes, short stories and songs, which convey the rules in a playful and relaxed atmosphere. Another effective practice in this stage of acquisition of basic written competence is the dictation, since it is expressively focused on testing spelling abilities in a more formal way and it allows children to have a positive or negative feedback on their use of written language. It is important to underline that reading and writing are integrated practices, which "develop together and support each other" (Goodman, 1986: 47). In the first phases of autonomous writing, children rely on stories they have already heard or read in class and they try to relate them to their own personal experience. Children's written language at this stage has the form of short sentences and the text often lacks in cohesion. However, through regular reading and writing practices, children gradually improve their skills in terms of fluency, syntax and lexical complexity. They acquire the notions of textual coherence and cohesion. Moreover, they gradually build up background knowledge through the identification of different structures of texts according to different genres ('formal schemata'). <heading>2.5 The importance of additional disciplines</heading>In this section I would like to draw the attention to the additional disciplines scheduled within the National Curriculum, namely 'physical education', 'education to sound and music' and 'education to images'. Psychological and physical factors are very important for the learning process of children and 'physical education' can play an important role in the development of coordination, spatial and temporal organization skills, control of posture, good attention and concentration abilities, etc. These are fundamental prerequisites for the normal acquisition of reading and writing skills (Massenz, 2004). Moreover, the practice of gymnastic and other recreational activities in groups helps children to reinforce friendship relations amongst schoolmates and develop social qualities such as collaboration, cooperation, responsibility, self-control, self-discipline and leadership. 'Education to sound and music' is also very important in schools and it can be more than just a source of enjoyment and pleasure. Many studies have focused on the relations between music and language development. In particular, music can help to control the instruments of speech, making the voice more modulated, varied and expressive; it can be useful in identifying hearing problems and it enables to overcome them through special programmes working on pitch, duration, intensity, rhythm and timbre; it is effective in developing reading abilities, making fine aural discriminations between different sound, experiencing decoding and left to right orientation (Pugh and Pugh, 1998). Douglas and Willatts (1994: 105) claim that "the abilities to process melodic as well as rhythmic aspects of music analytically may help to stimulate a similar response to language". This can be noticed in the practice of learning nursery rhymes, finger plays, songs and poems, which leads naturally to the acquisition of phonological awareness which is an important part of children's subsequent reading development. Furthermore, these practices help children in the recognition of onsets of words and rimes (opening and end unit respectively) and encourage them towards another advance in reading, being able to read new words by analogy (Goswami and Bryant, 1990). During 'education to images' hours, children perceive the power of pictures and images in terms of expressiveness and communication. They learn how to describe their feelings and experiences through different materials and techniques, being involved as active participants. Moreover, the teacher promotes the discussion of pictures of different kinds (advertisements, photographs, paintings, etc.), stimulating children to evaluate meanings, communicative intentions and intents of persuasion. Therefore, the approach to art and language of images since the first years of education seems to be an effective strategy both for the acquisition of communicative and expressive skills and for the development of analytical and critical abilities. <heading>2.6 The 'religion hour'</heading>The 'religion hour' is not limited to reading and commenting the Bible and the Gospel in class. It is a literacy practice that can be analysed on three different levels. First of all, the teacher reads the sacred texts and explains their content to the children. It is the linguistic level, in which the stress is posed on the meaning of the message. The second level of analysis is the critical level, in which the attention is put on the interpretation of the message and its implication for the lives of people. In this part of the lesson the teacher encourages the interaction with the children, trying to relate spiritual issues to their experiences in everyday life. She also introduces moral and ethical topics which are discussed comparing points of view of different religions and cultures in the world. The religious practice in the classroom can be finally analysed on a social level. Religion plays a fundamental role in the life of a small community. It is a factor of cohesion, a point to which the individual members converge in a unique homogeneous group. The teaching of religion is seen as an important matter for children, who are introduced to religion by members of the community, in religious classes and during the Sunday mass. Therefore, the 'religion hour' acquires a significant value both from the educational and social point of view, connecting the school to the community. <heading>3. Conclusion</heading>As this brief analysis shows, literacy practices in the primary school are various and complex. It is evident that literacy is far more than just learning how to read and write. The different activities are expressly conceived to engage children in active reading and writing, encouraging discussions and sharing of ideas and experiences for the development of independent thoughts and judgements. This is a critical approach to literacy, which aims at "a joint interactive construction of knowledge through critical enquiry" (Baker and Jones, 1998: 598). Literacy is thus considered as a mean to develop consciousness and critical thinking habits; an instrument that helps children to learn how to explain and analyse the world and the society. The teacher is not only the main mediator of literacy, but she also has an important role in integrating the school, the families and the community. Teaching is not perceived as an independent and distinct activity, but it is embedded in a continuous dialogue and exchange of information among the school and the outside reality. 