<heading>1. Introduction</heading><heading>1.1 What is this study about? </heading>The main aim of this study is to describe the meanings and patterns of use of a nominal form of address, the vocative mate, which belongs to the group of general names known under the label of terms of friendship. The starting points for the survey are the Oxford English Dictionary 2ed. on CD-ROM version 3.0 (2002), A Dictionary of Epithets and Terms of Address by Leslie Dunkling (1990) and some of the most relevant references on systems of address, which permit a complete and detailed description of this vocative. Moreover, data provided by the British National Corpus (BNC) are analyzed along the sociolinguistically relevant dimensions of gender, age, social class and level of formality, in order to present a picture of the uses and meanings of the term mate in today's British English. The final aim of the study is to point out the areas of overlap with the previous literature and the evolution in the use of this vocative by English speakers. <heading>1.2 Theories on address: a brief overview. </heading>In every language and society, a reasonable question arises when people take part to communicative exchanges, namely whether and how participants will be addressed, named and described. We can define the totality of available forms and strategies of address and their interrelations in one language as system of address (Braun, 1988). The way in which the speaker of a certain language uses this repertory of variants can reflect her social and linguistic background, so that we can consider "personal address [...] a sociolinguistic subject par excellence" (Philipsen and Huspek 1985: 94). Roger Brown and his colleagues are considered the initiators of modern sociolinguistic investigation on forms of address. Throughout their papers (Brown and Gilman, 1960; Brown and Ford, 1961), they discuss the different use of pronominal forms along the dimensions of power and solidarity, pointing the attention to the interpersonal relationship amongst the participants of the interaction (mainly in terms of age, professional status and degree of intimacy). Friederike Braun goes one step further in the investigation, emphasizing variation according to sociolinguistic factors like regional dialect, social class, education, age, gender, ideology, religion, etc. All these features are the basis on which variants are created, both in the address repertoire and in the rules according to which forms are selected. <heading>2. Forms of address and vocatives</heading>Before introducing a more detailed classification of the forms of address, it is important to distinguish between bound forms (integrated parts of a sentence) and unbound forms (syntactically free forms; preceding, succeeding or being inserted into the sentence). The most part of pronouns of address tend to appear as bound forms and carry a syntactic function of subject or object, while nouns of address occur as free forms. To a certain extent, the term vocative can be considered a synonym of unbound form (including also unbound pronouns). Vocatives share many properties with unbound items. They are not integrated into the structure of the clause, which explains their variable word order (vocatives may precede, follow or interrupt a clause). They are also independent from a prosodic point of view (they have a separate intonation profile). Only their meanings and their functions within the social event of conversation are not totally independent. According to a specific social component, there are rules that systematically govern the choices speakers make and the meanings receivers attribute to these same choices. This social component consists of information about the dyad, namely speaker-addressee relationship, speaker evaluation of addressee (and situation), and speaker's social background as expressed in the use of a given form of address (Braun, 1988). A substantial contribution to the studies of vocatives is given by Zwicky (1974). In his paper the author point to the role of vocatives in getting the addressee's attention (call vocatives), and in maintaining or emphasizing the relationship between speaker and addressee (address vocatives). He goes on underlining two important properties of vocatives: idiomaticity and sociolinguistic markedness. In his opinion, vocatives convey much additional information, namely the general attitude of the speaker toward the addressee, the speaker's estimate of her status, the degree of intimacy between the participants, the level of politeness, the level of formality, the speaker's judgments about the addressee, the speaker's belonging to a particular subculture, social class, geographical dialect. Since the context of use and the social characteristics of the participants to the conversation play such an important role in selecting the appropriate address form, it is not easy to define meanings and functions of a term of address in a definitive way. The same problem exists also for a classification of vocatives. A complete and detailed classification is proposed by Biber [et al.] (1999), who identify eight classes of terms of address in English. The eight classes described by the authors can be grouped into four more general groups: proper names (first names, last names, nicknames, etc.), kinship terms, titles and occupational terms (honorifics, social titles, medical and academic professional titles, etc.), endearments and terms of friendship. In this study I will point the attention to the last group. The principal characteristic of these vocatives is that they cannot be defined only by formal or semantic features. They are nouns and adjectives which convey general ideas of affection or friendliness and their literal meaning is only the starting point in the definition of their sense. An exhaustive description of these forms can be proposed only relying on the context of use and on the function they serve. In other words, their meaning is conventionalized to a certain extent, but it is the way they are used (and the information inferred by this use) which each time defines the exact meaning. Another difference between this group of forms of address and the other (at least kinship terms and titles) is the great productivity of the former. Endearments and terms of friendship can be considered an open class of items, in which linguistic creativity and individual imagination play an important role. The group of endearments and friendship terms include words and expressions like angel, baby, boy, buddy, dear, doll, duckie, dude, feller, honey, kid, lad, love, lovely, mate, my darling, pal, sweetie, etc. (Dunkling, 1990). The main problem associated with the great heterogeneity of these vocatives is the halo of vagueness in meaning which surrounds them and the difficulty in defining whether a term is an endearment or a friendship term. The gender of the speaker and of the addressee seems to be a determinant dimension. Kramer (1975) affirms that women and men have different repertoires of address forms. In fact, women tend to use terms of endearment, which are considered 'sweet' terms, to express fondness and affection, while men are more likely to address each other in a 'rough' manner, using friendship terms which convey a sense of camaraderie and male solidarity. <heading>3. The vocative mate in the previous literature</heading>In this section I will give a closer look to a form of address in particular: the vocative mate. The main properties, functions and patterns of use of this vocative will be presented, relying on two dictionaries: the  Oxford English Dictionary 2ed. on CD-ROM version 3.0 and A Dictionary of Epithets and Terms of Address by L. Dunkling. The entry for mate in the OED describes its referent as "a habitual companion, an associate, fellow, comrade". The definition is completed with a statement which is very important for this study. Here the OED says: "Used as a form of address by sailors, labourers, etc". The main idea conveyed by the OED about this form of address is its reciprocal use among people from the working class. From his part, Dunkling (1990) provides an analysis oriented more on usage and social meanings, pointing out information about uses, connotations and variations. Biber [et al.] (1999) in the Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English considers mate a marker of familiarity in British relationships between speaker and hearer. Before proceeding with the corpus analysis, it is worth giving a brief summary of the main characteristics and patterns of use of the vocative mate found in the relevant literature: Mate is a term of friendship, in particular a camaraderie form, and it conveys the general meaning of 'companion', 'friend', 'comrade'; Mate is used mainly by men addressing other men amongst working-class speakers (sailors, labourers, colleagues, etc.) ; Mate has the function of maintaining and reinforcing the relationship between speaker and addressee; Mate appears frequently in informal contexts (service encounters, small talks, etc.); Some variants are possible, adding the suffix -y for diminutive forms ('matey') or the suffix -s for plural forms ('mates', 'mateys'). <heading>4. The vocative mate in the BNC</heading>In the following section the vocative mate is analyzed more thoroughly through linguistic data provided by the British National Corpus through the Corpus Query System 'Sketch Engine'. The BNC is a sample corpus of about 100 million words collected from both written (about 90%) and spoken texts (about 10%). For the aims of this study, data were collected taking into account only occurrences from spoken texts to describe the spontaneous use of the term amongst English speakers in Great Britain. A first selection within the Query Results was made in order to rule out homonyms. All the occurrences in which the word mate is used as verb or as common noun have been removed whereas the cases in which mate is used as a vocative have been retained. The total number of occurrences considered is 323, from 77 different texts. Texts were recorded from 1990 to 1994. The great deal of contextual information provided in the text headers allows us to consider characteristics of both speakers and texts in the discussion along the social dimensions of gender, age, social class and level of formality. In what follows the main functions and patterns of use of mate will be pointed out. <heading>4.1 Usage along social dimensions</heading><heading>4.1.1 Gender</heading>The variable of gender provides striking results about the usage of the vocative mate. Among a total of 124 different people, the number of female speakers is anything but irrelevant (31) if compared to male speakers (70). The percentage is of about 26% for women and about 56% for men, but if we do not consider the group of 'sex unknown', they increase to 30% and 70% respectively. These results are clearly in contrast with the descriptions in the literature, which considers mate a specifically male vocative. Little can be said about differences in use between male speakers and female speakers, because the contextual information is often incomplete or unclear. However, a general hypothesis can be outlined. Women tend to use the vocative mate above all during conversations within the family, and sometimes in addressing members of the family (especially sons and daughters). Uses amongst colleagues, friends and acquaintances are less frequent and seem to be in imitation of male behaviour. This usage of mate expressing friendship and companionship is widespread amongst men. <heading>4.1.2 Age</heading>As far as the age of the speaker is concerned, it seems that the use of mate is not limited to a particular age group. The data show that the vocative is distributed in all age groups, although a more frequent use is observed for men between 15-24 years old and 25-34 years old (about 23% and 19% respectively), and for women between 25-34 years old (about 26%) and 45-59 years old (about 22%). The variation along the sex and age dimensions is summarized in Table I. <table/><heading>4.1.3 Social class</heading>Another dimension which provides interesting results is that of speakers' social class. All the authors who describe the uses of the vocative mate agree on the fact that it is a form principally employed by speakers from the working-class and lower middle-class groups. After the analysis of the corpus, a different pattern may be outlined, although the sample observed is restricted to 41 speakers and 190 occurrences because of unclassified data. While a prevalence of working-class speakers could still be true for the frequency of use (about 38% of the occurrences are produced by speakers from DE social class against a 13% produced by AB social class speakers), it is no longer so obvious when the number of speakers is taken into account. The number of speakers, in fact, is more equally distributed among the different groups. A more detailed description is presented in Table II below. <table/>From a closer analysis of the data, an important bond between gender of the speaker and social class can be outlined. Almost all the women who use mate as a form of address belong to the C2 and DE social class. It means that the use of mate is still marked amongst women if considered along the social class dimension. This is not the case with male speakers, who are distributed among the four social class groups. A further observation needs to be made about the spreading use of mate amongst the students in secondary schools and universities. The reciprocal usage of the vocative is intended as 'social cement' and plays an important role in the creation of closer in-group nets. This phenomenon is surprising because it is extended to high social class students, in possible contrast with what was found by Ervin-Tripp: "In upper-class boarding schools, boys and some girls address each other by last name instead of first name" (1972: 224). The formal use of the last name as form of address amongst upper-class students pointed out by Ervin-Tripp may have been replaced by the more informal use of the term of friendship mate. [1] <heading>4.1.4 Level of formality</heading>According to the literature, mate is a vocative utilized mainly in informal settings, with a very informal connotation. The BNC distinguishes two groups of spoken texts: 1- a demographic component of informal encounters recorded by a socially-stratified sample of respondents, selected by age group, sex, social class and geographic region. 2- a context-governed component of more formal encounters (meetings, debates, lectures, seminars, radio programmes and the like), categorized by topic and type of interaction (educational and informative, business, institutional, leisure). The trend of informality claimed by the literature is supported by the kind of texts which make up the Query Results. In a total of 77 texts, 52 of them are demographic texts (about 70%), while only 25 are context-governed texts (about 30%). Furthermore, the majority of context-governed texts in which mate is used are business conversations (see Table III). The spreading use of the vocative mate in these more formal contexts could be a signal of the increasing informality in social relationships. <table/><heading>4.2 Functions and patterns of use</heading>Let's now analyse the occurrences in more details to point out the main functions and patterns of use of the vocative. From a structural point of view the term tends to appear in final position, both in long and short sentences. The concordances show that the vocative very often collocates with expressions of agreement such as alright, okay, right, yeah. A few examples are found with expressions of disagreements such as no, not a lot, not really. Moreover, mate collocates with informal greetings like cheerio, cheers, bye, hello, see you later, or thanks like thanks, thank you, and the colloquial ta. Instances in which these expressions cumulate are very frequent and in many cases, the form of address can be surrounded by pauses and hesitators. In addition, mate is quite common in utterances that underline the involvement of the speaker through expressions of surprise and excitement (interjections and words like cor, blimey). [2] Another interesting co-occurrence is that of the vocative mate with expletives and taboo words, especially referring to sexuality. These uses of swear words may be traced back to the high informality of the settings in which conversations take place, but above all they reveal the existence of very closed relationships between the participants (on the other hand, the usage of expletives as terms of address is common among very intimate friends - Braun (1988), Biber [et al.] (1999), Gramley and Pätzold (2004)). [3] In all the examples discussed above, the use of the vocative mate implies a certain degree of friendliness, or at least an attitude which is not hostile to the addressee. Only few utterances show an unfriendly connotation of mate, which is associated with offensive expressions like bollocks, fucking wanker, load of crap, up yours. [4] Defining if a linguistic item has a positive or a negative connotation is not always an easy matter, especially when vocatives are concerned. Words of this kind have an inherent pragmatic force and in most cases it is the way they are used which determines the precise meaning. Partington (1998) tackles the problem of connotation analysing the semantic prosody of terms, assuming the spreading of connotational colouring beyond single word boundaries. In other words, the favourable or unfavourable connotation of a term in an utterance is influenced by the positive or negative orientation of the words it collocates with. As far as the vocative mate is concerned, corpus data show a statistical tendency toward a positive connotation, thanks to the contribution of favourable elements like greetings, expressions of agreement and gratitude, phrases of surprise and excitement. Also the employment of certain swear words with ironic intent conveys friendly attitudes. Only few concordances show a negative connotation of mate, due to the collocation with insults and offensive. With reference to Zwicky (1978), who introduced a distinction between address vocatives and call vocatives, and according to the occurrences in the Query Results, the main function served by the vocative mate seems to be that of regulating social relations (address vocative). It is employed both to maintain and reinforce the relationship between speaker and interlocutor (e.g. with greetings, expressions of agreement and gratitude, etc.) and, to a lesser extent, to create distance conveying unfriendliness and even aggressiveness. On the contrary, examples in which mate can be considered a device for attracting the attention of the listener are very rare; in this case it often occurs together with proper names and interjections, which act like attention getters as well. [5] Finally, with regard to formal variation, only few examples are recorded in the corpus: the diminutive form matey, the possessive form my mate, and the more intimate form old mate. [6] <heading>5. Conclusion</heading>The more striking result of the study is the difference between the uses described in previous literature and the present uses of the vocative as recorded in the BNC. Two main reasons may be suggested for the observed discrepancies. The first refers to the work by Dunkling (1990), who examines the vocative in more details and gives information about meaning and patterns of use. In this case the incongruity is probably due to the fact that the author describes the term of address drawing on English novels written in the 1950s, which are very distant from the effective use captured in the texts of the BNC, recorded in the 1990s. The same is true for the essays published in the 1970s and in the 1980s, which may depict social habits (and linguistic behaviours) very different from today. The second reason could be traced back to the  Oxford English Dictionary providing a diachronic description rather than a detailed synchronic one. The results point out that the usage of the vocative mate tends to be less socially marked than before, especially as far as the dimension of gender and status are concerned. This does not mean that the term is used in the same way by men and women or by speakers from different social classes, but it is evident that a clear-cut distinction no longer exists. Moreover, the vocative plays an important role in conversations amongst students, serving the function of 'social cement' and acting as an effective in-group marker. Finally, it is important to notice the spreading use of mate amongst colleagues in business settings, while previously the vocative was reported to be limited to conversations within the lower working class. This may also be considered a signal of the increasing informality in social relationships. 