<heading>1.0 Brief background to study:</heading>In order to determine how words are stored and retrieved from within the mind psycholinguists have undertaken many experiments in an attempt to establish how closely connected words are. Aitchinson (2003) suggests that words are related to each other in the form of 'a multi-dimensional cobweb in which every item is attached to scores of others' (2003:84). Early research concentrated on meaning networks and 'finding out the strength of a link between one particular word and another' (2003:84), suggesting that links between words were formed by 'habits'. When certain words were frequently associated with each other they were thought to 'develop strong ties' (2003:85). A way to test these theories was through 'word-association tests'. In these experiments subjects are asked to respond with the first word that comes into their head when faced with certain stimuli. Moss (1996) describes the motivation behind these studies as the belief that 'word associations provide a direct window onto the underlying structure of semantic memory' (1996:1). Emphasis was placed not on the individual but in the general responses for large groups. Results showed that different people generally gave rather similar results. Aithcinson (2003) noted that 'the consistency of the results suggested to psychologists that they might therefore be able to draw up a reasonably reliable 'map' of the average person's 'word-web' (2003:85). I will be conducting the same experiment to see which relationships are most frequent among my subjects. I will then assess how reliable this experiment is in determining which words are connected in the lexicons of my subjects. <heading>2.0 Description of project:</heading>I chose a mixture of nouns, adjectives and verbs as my stimuli. In each word class I chose a selection of frequencies, i.e. high and lower frequencies. For example; 'hair' and 'love' had a similar high frequency, and 'sing' and 'bread' had a similar lower frequency. This ensured that all subjects would have a similar familiarity with the selection of nouns, verbs and adjectives. It also ensured that the experiment took into account that the words we encounter vary in frequency. In order to assess if we map all words in a certain way it is important to look at whether specific relationships are more common in a variety of types of words. For example: do people respond with coordinates for the majority of their answers despite the frequency of the word. I will therefore be look at the relationships between the words compared to the stimulus. I will also be looking to see if there are any significant differences between the younger and older participants. I chose two 20 year old females, and two 50 years old adults, one male, one female. <heading>3.0 Results</heading><table/><heading>Results continued..... </heading>A pie chart showing the most frequent relationships between the stimuli and the participants responses. <heading>Responding with a matching word class (to the original stimuli)</heading><table/><heading>3.1 Analysis and discussion of results:</heading>The results showed that certain relationships were more common than others. In particular was the selection of an antonym. All subjects, despite their age, selected the same word for a variety of the stimuli. For example, 'new-old', 'big-small'. The subjects also tended to pick items if they were part of a pair, therefore coordinates and collocates were common. Interestingly one of the words I chose caused problems for all of the subjects. I chose the word 'chips'. If one has selected the word 'fish' I would have expected one of the most common responses to be 'chips' (Moss 1996:49). However when I presented the subjects with the second half of a pair it elicited a confused or different response. The subjects delayed their answer on this stimulus or came up with semantically unrelated words. One subject picked 'daddy', this I presume relates to an advertising campaign which involved the question 'daddy or chips'. One of the subjects selected the word 'chops'. This I can only presume relates to the rhythmic relationship between certain words, for example 'hip-hop' and 'flip-flop', it is also possible that a slip of the tongue meant the subject was intending to say 'chip-shop'. As the word 'chips' was pluralized it may have caused problems among the subjects. This could suggest that words with inflections may be treated differently within the lexicon. However it could also be that because 'chips' is so often linked to 'fish' it is difficult when they are separated, as you may be expecting a word to precede it. Aitchinson (2003) suggests that in language there are 'numerous 'freezes', (whereby) pairs of words which have been frozen into a fixed order'. (2003:91). Some of the words I chose were more flexible, 'chips' perhaps was more restrictive thus problematic to the participants. Field (2003) suggests that 'adults tend to choose a word in the same word class as the stimulus'. It was evident from my results that the majority of subjects responded to the stimuli with words from the same word class. This was particularly evident when it came to adjectives. 91.7% of adjectives were responded to with another adjective. 87.5% of the nouns were responded to with another noun. The statistic for verbs was slightly less, 67.5%. This may be because people often associate an action with an object, for example: read and book. However the majority of the time subjects did respond with a word in the same word class. <heading>3.2 Age differences:</heading>One of the aims of the experiment was to see if there were any differences between the older and younger participants, in terms of their responses. However as my experiment was only on a small scale it makes it difficult to make generalizations about any significant age differences among the participants. In general the responses were similar, however in one instance a response could be described as an indication of the age of the participant. When presented with the word 'hair', a participant responded with 'loss'. This would be more likely to be expressed by someone older; this could also be an indication of gender as hair loss is more common in males. However it is important to note that the other responses to this word gave no indication of age, thus it cannot be assumed that these demographic features affect the association of words. The main difference I noted between to two age groups was the time it took to respond to the stimuli. The 2 older participants took slightly longer to give me their answers. This is concurrent with the research of Cramer (1968) who found that older subjects had 'longer associative reaction times than younger adults'. However I cannot describe my results as conclusive as I only had a comparison of 2 older adults to 2 younger adults there is not enough evidence to suggest that older adults take longer to respond. <heading>4.0 Conclusions- </heading>The word-association test is useful in that it shows that humans tend to generate similar results, Moss (1996) also states that the test is useful as 'a simple measure of relatedness between two words', however the results produced are not very conclusive about how words are stored within the mind as a whole. Aitchinson (2003) suggests the main problem with word association tests is that 'they cannot tell us about the probable structure of the human word-web' (2003:85). She identifies the fact that as participants are only required to give one response this cannot 'fully reflect the variety of semantic links that would presumably exist in their semantic memory' (cited in Moss 1996:2). When participants are asked to give the first word that comes into their head there is a slight delay between what the person thinks and what they actually say. Before the participants give their answer they are making a quick decision as to what word they wish to choose. De Groot (1989) found that even when asking participants to respond quickly they take about one and half seconds to respond. This shows there may be a decision making process occurring before responses are given. Aitchinson also notes that the responses are also multifarious. The top responses for most words are semantically similar but some connections are stronger than others. Aitchinson gives the example of butter which is linked to bread, yellow, soft, cream, eggs, milk, cheese. Bread is linked to butter as you eat the two together, whereas yellow and soft describe butter itself. Cream, eggs, milk and cheese are other kinds of dairy food. Therefore although the most people tend to respond in the same way the answers do not help us to determine how words are linked within the lexicon. The test in itself is considered to be unnatural due to the fact that the words are presented on their own. Normal speech would involve the stimuli being surrounded by other words therefore the process of retrieval would no doubt be different. Equally the surrounding words can have an effect on the meaning, Aithcinson (2003) concludes that 'if a word's associations can be changed so easily by the context then it is possibly wrong to assume that we can ever lay down fixed and detailed pathways linking words in the mental lexicon' (2003:85). This I suspect would be the case with one of the some of the stimuli that I chose, particularly 'chips'. If this word occurred in a sentence, or in a different order, it may well have elicited more expected connotations. It is evident through my results that there are definite commonalities among participants. Moss argues that this is often because certain words are more commonly linked, for example 'cat and dog'. Aitchinson also notes that 'two types of link seem to be particularly strong: connections between coordinates and collocation links' (2003:101). This was true with my results although antonyms featured highly. Although it is undeniable that there are patterns in the responses of participants it is important to note that these findings merely help to provide 'a general framework' (Aitchinson, 2003:101) of how words are linked within the lexicon. Perhaps more useful is the technique of priming which looks at how closely words are associated within the lexicon. Priming measures how quickly participants notice words which are/are not associated with the sentence. Field (2003:17) uses the example 'We saw a camel at the zoo .... fosk - bank - lidge - hump'. The participant has to press a button every time they see an actual word. The reaction time to 'hump' will be quicker than 'bank' because it has already been triggered by the semantically related 'camel'. This test is more useful than word association as it looks at how closely words are associated before activation occurs and also how long the activation lasts. This gives a deeper insight than previous word-association experiments. 