Sugarcane is a typical example of a C 4 photosynthetic plant- that is, the plant fixes carbon dioxide from the air into a four-carbon sugar, instead of a C 3 sugar- that occurs in approximately 99.6% of flowing plants. In a change to use C 4 fixation, the plants have evolved a different set of stages to C 3 photosynthesis- that overall makes photosynthesis a more efficient system for sugar production. In plants, the major photosynthetic organ is the leaf. For photosynthesis to occur, there needs to be a supply of carbon dioxide, water, and light energy. A C 3 dicotyledonous leaf (TS, shown in Fig 1) is designed to get the most of these materials. At the top of the diagram is a layer of simple, unspecialised (no chloroplasts present), flattened cells called epidermal cells. These cells secrete cutin, which is a polymer of fatty acids, with cross-links that form a network that is embedded in a matrix of waxes. Cutin is deposited to reduce water loss through transpiration, due to the waxy layer being impermeable to water. The layer also prevents most pathogens entering the leaf. Below the upper epidermis is the palisade mesophyll, which is the most important photosynthetic tissue of the plant. The cells are tightly packed together, in a columnar arrangement. Inside these cells there are chloroplasts, that are too, tightly packed together. Using the cytoplasmic stream, the chloroplasts are able to move within the cell to get the most sunlight possible. In high light intensities, and quality, the chloroplasts are evenly distributed around the cell, because they can all get the light needed. However, when the light intensities are reduced, the chloroplasts move closer together, at the top of the palisade cell, to get the maximum possible light energy. In most C 4 plants, the Kranz Anatomy is present (Fig 2). The arrangement of the mesophyll cells are that the palisade cells are never more than two cells away from a bundle sheath cell that surrounds the vascular bundle. This is because the first stage of photosynthesis is in the mesophyll cell, and these products passed to the bundle sheath cells through the plasmodesmata where it is converted to sugars and passed into the phloem. The chloroplasts of the bundle sheath cells have far less grana, and longer thylakoid lamella. The bundle sheath cells are also present in C 3 cells, but are smaller in size and just allow the products of photosynthesis from the mesophyll cells into the phloem. The second major tissue for photosynthesis in C 3 plants is the spongy mesophyll tissue. There are less chloroplast present in these cells, compared to palisade cells, due to that light intensities will be less because the cells are located towards the lower down in the structure of the leaf. The arrangement of these cells is so that they create air spaces between them. This is due to their irregular shape. The intercellular air spaces are so that gaseous exchange can take place- carbon dioxide in, and oxygen out for photosynthesis. The air spaces are also needed for water balance within the plant, and the transport of materials around the plant. At the bottom of the leaf are the lower epidermal cells. These are the same as the upper layer, except there are specialised cells located within them. These are called guard cells of the stomata. The opening of the stomata allows carbon dioxide, oxygen, and water vapour to all enter and leave the leaf. The stomata have only a few chloroplasts present. <heading>The Biochemistry Of PhotosynthesisLight- Dependent Reaction (Fig 3):</heading>In both C 3 and C 4 plants, the chlorophyll molecules are arranged in the membranes of the thylakoids so that the haem group projects from the outer surface. The groups are called light harvesting complexes. At the base of the funnel like structure, is a Photosystem. The chlorophyll molecules in the light-harvesting complex collect light energy and feed it to the chlorophyll molecules in the photosystem. Once light shines onto the plant, the light harvesting complexes in the chloroplasts absorb the visible light corresponding to the wavelengths accessible, and give the energy to either photosystem I or II. This quanta of energy excites the electrons in the photosystem, and instead of the electron immediately loosing its electron, and returning to its photosystem, it is captured by one of the electron acceptor. This starts the conversion of light energy into chemical energy. The loss of an electron causes the photosystem to become oxidised, and the gaining of an electron causes the acceptor to become reduced. The electron starts to lose its energy, and therefore travels downhill in energy levels, passing between electron carriers, and every time releasing energy. This process provides energy to join ADP with a phosphate group to form ATP. In the non-cyclic pathway reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate, NADPH 2 is also produced. In the non-cyclic photophosphorylation the light shines onto the photosystems, and electron leave and reduce the acceptors that they join to. PS II is neutralised from its oxidised state by 2e' from the photolysis of water (H 2O 2H+ + ½O 2 + 2e-). PS I is neutralised by electrons from photosystem 2 that move downhill. The energy from this causes ATP production. The electrons lost from photosystem 1 pass down electron carriers to NADP and combine with H+ from the photolysis of water to create NADPH 2. In cyclic photophosphorylation, electrons that were lost from PS1 are recycled back to its original photosystem via a chain of electron carriers. This produces ATP but does not reduce NADP. The ATP and NADPH 2 move out of the thylakoids membrane, into the stroma for the light independent reaction. <heading>Light Independent Reaction:</heading>The light independent reaction does not need the use of light directly, but needs ATP and NADPH + H+ to reduce carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide gas enters the plant through the stomata and into a mesophyll cell. In C 4 plants (Fig 4.2), the gas is fixated to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) using PEP carboxylase to form a 4-carbon molecule- oxaloacetate. The enzyme malate dehydrogenase then reduces the oxaloacetate molecule into malic acid. The molecule then travels out of the stroma of the mesophyll chloroplast- and through plasmodesmata into the neighbouring bundle sheath cell's chloroplast. Here, the malic acid reacts to produce CO 2 and pyruvate (as well as reducing NADPH+). The pyruvate then exits the bundle sheath cell, and can be regenerated into PEP with energy from ATP. The remaining CO 2 is then used in the same way as C 3 plants- in the Calvin Cycle (Fig 4.1). The gas is the joined to an acceptor- ribulose bisphosphate RuBP. This occurs using the enzyme RuBP carboxylase. The product formed is a 6 carbon sugar, but is unstable and breaks down immediately to 2x 3-carbon 3-phosphoglycerate. This is the first true product of photosynthesis. The reducing power of NADPH + H+ and energy store of ATP causes an oxygen atom to be removed from the 3-phosphoglycerate. This changes the molecule into Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. This sugar contains more chemical energy than 3-phosphoglycerate, and is the first carbohydrate made. For every 6 molecules of triose phosphate produced, 5 of them are used to regenerate the RuBP. This involves a complex cycle, containing 3-7 carbon sugar phosphates. The last of the ATP energy from the light dependant reaction is used to phosphorylate ribulose phosphate into RuBP. The remaining triose phosphate is synthesised into its final products that can include starch, lipids, amino acids, and sugars. The only difference between the Calvin cycle in C 3 and C 4 plants is the location. It, along with the rest of photosynthesis takes place in the mesophyll chloroplasts, whereas the Calvin cycle takes place in the bundle sheath cell's chloroplast. The reason why the Calvin cycle takes place in the bundle sheath cell is to prevent Photorespiration. This occurs due to that RuBP carboxylase fixes O 2 as well as CO 2. When O 2 fits in the active site of the RuBP carboxylase, the ribulose bisphosphate doesn't break down evenly into 2x 3-phosphoglcerate molecules but into one (where it will continue with the stages above). The other molecule produced is phosphoglycolate. This molecule cannot follow the stages, but instead has to travel to the cell's peroxisome, then mitochondrion to convert to a 3-phosphoglycerate. However this process causes an overall loss of a CO 2 molecule. This faulty mechanism due to RuBP carboxylase can cause a loss of 30-40% of carbohydrate that they should be producing if they are photorespiring. The transfer of CO 2 into the bundle sheath cell separates the light-dependant reaction from the light-independent reaction- therefore no oxygen is produced in the bundle sheath cell- increasing the productivity of carbohydrates. Also, the PEP carboxylase that is used to initially fixate the carbon dioxide from outside the chloroplast works very efficiently and is not inhibited by high oxygen concentrations, therefore a higher concentration of substrate (CO 2) is built up in the bundle sheath cell, making RuBP carboxylase more efficient also. The high build up of the carbon dioxide usually stops the CO 2 concentration being the limiting factor. Because sugarcane grows optimally in high light intensities, a high quantity of oxygen molecules is produced. The plant therefore has an advantage of C 3 plants because its RuBP carboxylase is not being inhibited; therefore more sugars are being produced. The C 4 system has an economical importance for the agricultural industry. If C 4 photosynthesis and a Kranz anatomy were to be able to become incorporated into terrestrial C 3 plants that are grown in the warmer climates- a substantially higher biomass will be recorded, therefore decreasing the length of time before harvesting. This could allow for extra crops to be grown (depending on the type of crop, nutrient levels, climate etc). The C 4 system also shows the limitations towards C 3 photosynthesis, or mainly RuBP carboxylase. If this enzyme were modified so it would not photorespire, the consequences may be similar to that noted above.  <figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/>