Food security can be defined as when all people, at all times, have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, (FAO, 2007). China's rapid growth in population, development and industrialisation in recent years has not just surprised many people, but the consequence of such accelerated growth has implications that dominate the country's government and will have continued global effects. The following points will be addressed to consider China's current situation with regard to food security: <list>Background to China General introduction Sustainability concerns for food security Factors contributing to China's sustainability concernsPotential solutions for the present and the future 3.1 Stakeholders 3.2 Development pathways4. Conclusion </list><heading>Background to China</heading><heading>General introduction</heading>China is a country located in East Asia, covering a land area of 9,596,960 sq km, of which 9,326,410 sq km is land and 270,550 sq km is water. In 2005, the land use was calculated at approximately 15% for arable land, 1% for permanent crops and 84% as other, ie; urban or industrial land use, (CIA, 2007). As was mentioned, China is host to an extensive source of water, however as Changming (1998) commented in his work, the problem is it is not located geographically where it is required. The climate in the country is diverse; in the North, where there is roughly up to 500mm rain annually, it is sub-arctic and the soil type ranges from black chernozems to chestnut brown pedocals to gray brown pedalfers, (Vermeer, 1977). The south, where the inter-tropical convergence zone brings about seasonal changes to produce a tropical climate Dennett (1984), receives between 1500-1750mm of rain annually and is host to predominantly red and yellow pedalfer soils, (Vermeer, 1977). Dramatic changes in population have taken place in China in the last 50 years. Quoted figures in the literature estimate the population to be approximately 1.3 billion (CIA, 2007 and Richardson, 2006). Not only has the population increased, but so has China's economy, which has seen a steady rise between 1978 and 2006, when in the measure of purchasing power parity, the country was the second largest in the world, although in per capita terms this was nearer the average, (CIA, 2007). China currently has problems with poverty, however this issue is being addressed through the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). An example of their success is seen in the substantial fall in the number of undernourished people, from 303.8m (30% of population) to 119.1m (9% of population) between 1981 and 2000, (Anderson et al. 2003). However, problems are far from over as China continues to develop and despite advances in food security, many more solutions need to be found. The uneven development across China is benefiting some and not others. <heading>Sustainability concerns </heading>From the above introduction to China, it may be noted that the country has some underlying problems regarding the rate of growth, both in terms of population, economy and industry and whether these rates can be sustained. For the purposes of this report, however, the production of food, the problems that have occurred or are occurring at the present time and China's ability to sustain food production for its' large population, will all be addressed. The first concern is that of increased development, where as Richardson (2006) reports, China is currently loosing 1 million acres (approx 40,4600ha) of farmland to development per year. A large number of the population have and are still moving from rural to urban areas. In the last 25 years, 350 million people have migrated from rural areas. This therefore has resulted in a fall of 75% to 43% of the national force employed in agriculture, (Gairdner, 2006). China has prided itself in being able to produce 95% of its' total grain requirements, however, as the country has become more developed and people's life styles have changed, their demand for new products such as vegetables, meat, dairy products and oilseeds has caused a change in farming practices, (Index-China, 2000). Rice, wheat, soya and maize are by no means unwanted, but the ability for Chinese farmers to provide all the desired products from a decreasing area of land is impossible and therefore the reliance on imports looks certain to increase, (Gairdner, 2006). Fernández & Fernández-Stembridge (2007) include figures for the year 2005, when China was exporting $2781m of vegetables, $4056m aquatic and seawater products and $1062m of fresh vegetables, whilst importing $6979m of soyabean, $1649 of wheat and $2230m of cereals and flour cereals, clearly demonstrating China's emphasis on higher value products, (both exported and consumed within the country) and as a result, their importing of products for which they would previously have been virtually self-sufficient. A second concern, closely linked to the agricultural sector is the availability and use of water. As mentioned earlier, China's water resource is fairly extensive, however the location of that water in relation to the land used for cultivation is not ideal. This is due to the unfortunate topography and climate that spans China causing the South to be water rich, but too hilly for extensive farming and the North, which has flat pains and is well suited to agricultural cultivation, to be water impoverished, (Changming, 1998). Richardson (2006) put some numbers to the situation, clearly demonstrating that with two thirds of the cultivatable land in the North but only one fifth of the water, the sustainable use of what water there is and the provision of more from the South, still raises concerns for the future. 25% of all Chinese agriculture is irrigated, Gairdner (2006). China has always been successful in producing rice and has seen huge increases in its' ability to produce high yields from multiple crops throughout the year, however the need for water to irrigate those crops does put pressure on future production, as the amount of water required varies from 533-1533 cubic meters of water per mou, (Vermeer, 1977). Demand for water is an ever-increasing concern, as today there are around 450 million people who depend on Huang or yellow river and the Yangtze river for agriculture, fishing and other uses, (Karasov, 2002). A report carried out by the World Bank (2001) showed these afore mentioned rivers were, in many places, huge health risks and unsuitable for human contact. The Yellow river, in particular, has suffered from over extraction for irrigation and the construction of dams has caused the flow to be reduced, so much so that it sometimes does not reach the ocean, (Karasov, 2002). Sustainability concerns regarding China's food security are important, not just on a national level but on an international level, as food supply problems could compromise the country's rate of economic growth and political reform it is currently experiencing and an increased demand for imported food could dramatically influence global markets, especially for feed grain and the countries exporting it, (Heilig, 1999). Climate change, as for any developed country at the present time, is highly topical and this is particularly true of China as Zhang (2006) reported late last year that the country had slipped down the Climate Change Performance Index (CCPI) to be 54 th of 56. This not only has ramifications for the environment, further water degradation and risk of acid rain, but the global effect of climate change may affect vegetation cover, particularly with regard to the large areas of grassland which is used for livestock production. Climate change can exacerbate natural disasters such as floods and periods of drought, thereby posing an additional threat to China's food security, (Heilig, 1999). <heading>Factors contributing to China's sustainability concerns</heading>In order to understand China's present situation, it is important to consider how the country has developed and worked to achieve the agricultural system seen today. China has a long history of agricultural production. Although its' achievements are impressive, such as successive cropping, intercropping and inlaid cropping (that multiplied the cropping areas within the limited cultivatable area) and good soil husbandry that allowed the crops to be continually grown year after year, the drawbacks are intrinsically linked to these successes. Chinese agriculture has historically concentrated on increasing the yield per unit area and has not taken into consideration the advantages of increasing labour productivity. This didn't seem to matter because there were enough people to enable production, but, as population continued to increase, the pressure upon the limited amount of land to deliver intensified, (Guohua & Peel, 1991). China had successfully fed one fifth of the world's population from one fifth of the world's cultivatable land FAO, (1999), and still manages to produce vast amounts of grain with which to feed its own population. China's recent agricultural history has seen many changes in land reform, such as the farmland revolution in 1950 which redistributed land from landlords to landless peasants. Following this, the next reform came in the mid-1950s when the people's commune was established, encouraging people to group together as cooperatives to farm the land that had centrally controlled property rights, which ended in the collapse of the agricultural sector as farmers lost their freedom to farm the way they wanted, (Chen et al. 1999). Further reform came in the 1970s, when China decided to introduce family based contract systems where the farmer had land use rights and the right to make decisions, therefore allowing the farmer freedom to farm, even though there was no land ownership. Not only this, but the Chinese government offered incentives that were linked to production, which as we know already from the old CAP subsidy in the UK, has dramatic effects on production. However, there were problems associated with this reform, which were firstly the fragmentation of cultivated land, due to each household being entitled to plots of land, and with such a large population, this meant only a very small area of land per family, roughly 0.466 ha, (Ministry of Agriculture of China, 1993). Different areas of land were also more productive than others, which meant that the land a family owned could be located at multiple locations around a village, raising concerns about labour and time efficiency and large areas of potentially cultivatable land were wasted because of paths and boundaries separating people's land, Chen et al. 1999). The way land has been managed and cultivated in the past, which was shaped strongly by policy, is not the only factor affecting China's present problem regarding food security. As has already been mentioned, the current state of China's water supply, chiefly in two of the country's largest rivers, has been recently described as unsafe for human contact. The main cause for this sorry state of affairs is again due to the rapid industrialisation occurring in the country. Large investment in industry is not being met with the required infrastructure and services to process waste or emissions. A figure to highlight the severity of the problem comes from World Bank (2001) where 23.4 billion tonnes of sewage and industrial water was dumped into the Yangtze in the year 2000, which was 11% more than in the proceeding year. Organic and inorganic pollutants found in both the Yellow and Yangtze includes human excreta, industrial chemicals, heavy metals, cyanide and solvents, most of which originate from paper, steel, silk and chemical factories. Agriculture is also highlighted as being a contributor to this pollution and in some places, sediment run-off due to erosion was causing problems, both in the rivers and from cultivatable land, (World Bank, 2004). This is not only a problem in itself, but an ongoing problem with regard to agriculture, as water is required for irrigation and obviously the use of contaminated water in this instance would not be allowed. <heading>Potential solutions for now and the future </heading><heading> Stakeholders</heading>The following people are involved, would play a role or would be affected by plans to addresses the aforementioned problems of food security in China: <list>Local and national governmentThe rural farming communityCountries exporting food to China on the world marketThose involved in industry, if responsibility is put on them to reduce emissions etc.</list><heading>Development pathways</heading>There are many ways and means of instigating change to fulfil an objective, particularly one as big as the achieving a sustained level of food security. One successful 'bottom-up' project that was implemented in the Loess Plateau with help from the World Bank aimed to improve the potential for agricultural production, reduce erosion and equip farmers with knowledge and a long term strategy for management of the area. The land use of the small watersheds in the area prior to the project were as follows: uncultivated wasteland (40%), cropland (40%), mostly on low-productivity slopeland, trees and shrubs (10%); gullies (5%), and roads, villages, etc (5%). To improve this situation the project terraced 90,500 ha, afforested 90,900 ha and shrubbed 136,000ha, planted 26,700 ha for timber production, planted 30,890 ha orchards, re-established 100,140 ha of grasslands, irrigated 7,100 ha and installed sediment control dams. The World Bank played an important role in the project preparation and implementation and the total cost was $250 million; the cost per hectare was about $160. The objectives of the project were sustainable and coordinated social, economic, resource and environmental development of small watersheds and this proved successful. It was aimed at a local scale and it proved that land conservation is compatible with sustainable and productive agriculture and that they are mutually reinforcing. It achieved the creation of sustainable crop production on high-quality terraces and the protection of steep slopes with trees and shrubs. The farmer has also benefited, not just from having a more sustainable method of production, but legal protection for land-use rights and management techniques in the form of a land contract for the minimum of 50 years, ensuring that the long term benefit from the project and the initial investment lasts, (World Bank, 2004). As was mentioned earlier, poverty in China is still a problem, and small scale projects such as this help relieve people from that low level of living so that they can support themselves. Other projects such as FAO's South-South Cooperation initiative, part of the Special Programme for Food Security (SPFS), aim to strengthen cooperation between developing countries at different stages of development to improve agricultural productivity and ensure access to food for all, (Buerkle, 2007). The recent dispatch of experts to China to help and advise with water control, crop production, animal diversification, aquaculture and processing is to help China achieve it's Millennium Development Goals of halving poverty in China by 2015. Change and influence can also come 'top-down'. Policy and government decisions will also have an important role to play in the future of China's food security. In 2001 China became a member of the World Trade Organisation (WRO) Baihua (2006), which meant another period of change for farmers, when prices for domestic cereals fell. Although this may have had negative effects at first, excessive agricultural inputs and demand for water to produce the once large quantities of food have receded, meaning the land can now be used for other, more appropriate uses, such as the farming of cash crops and/or livestock, (UN, 2001). The UN is involved together with the World Bank to help China in this period of transition by improving agricultural infrastructure and service systems and enhancing protection of agricultural environment and resources. When considering development pathways, a holistic view of the problem and an awareness of other sectors and industries, which use of similar or the same resources, is important. Chenggui & Hongchun (2002) commented that to focus on the continued development of growing cereals is not sustainable in the long run, when problems such as water loss and soil erosion are happening. Therefore, it is important, not to out-source blame to other sectors, but jointly communicate with each other, so that development is equal across all sectors. For example, the need for a cleaner water supply for irrigation will involve stakeholders from more than just the agricultural sector. It would be important to see China continue to address problems at a local scale, with the help from the World Bank and FAO, enabling farmers to take control and be responsible for changes in agricultural production, protection of soils and contribute positively to improving water quality. Government should be responsible in maintaining reserve productive capability (Changgui & Hongchun, 2002) as the economic strength of the country has grown, the ability for its population to eat a more diverse diet has increased. With a population as large as China's and the uneven distribution of wealth and food, the capability for producing grain should not be something lost in the hast to supply and improve the diets/lives for those how can afford it. The ability for China to produce grain is deeply important, as this is important for the survival of many 1000's of people. To provide food security for everyone, China needs to retain the ability of producing grain when required, and the government will need to address this, and not be quick to rely on imports. <heading>4. Conclusion</heading>Monitoring of progress towards achieving improvements in food security is important. Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) are important and should still remain, however small scale indicators of improvement could be monitored by farm surveys, covering things such as measurements of rainfall run-off, rates of erosion and also could include the health and level of food intake of people on that farm. Information from all farms could then be collated and progress monitored at this local scale. Areas not progressing as well as other areas could then be addressed accordingly. Continued monitoring of water quality and water safety would also be advised, not just for agricultural use, but for the interest of the country. Food security for any country is important and the sustainable production of food in an ever increasingly developing and urban world is even more important. For a country such as China, whose huge population is exerting pressure on the environment and encroachment of urban sprawl is reducing land area for production of food, it seems impossible to propose sustainable methods of production. However, local projects to aid food production in rural areas should target issues such as soil erosion and to some degree water use, but the later is also highly dependant on sustainable industrial and domestic use of water. Government policy has its part to play, however, local scale projects will reach the isolated rural people quicker. For a sustainable future, China must broaden its thinking in giving agriculture the same importance as its newly developing industry, other wise, the future of China's food security will be reliance on imports and a demise of the people who skillfully work China's productive land. 