Hybrid creatures are a combination of human and animal, exposing a caricature of the base and bestial side of man. Their violent and exaggerated behaviours are perhaps a representation of uncontrollability, allegories of chaos which must be overcome under the watchful eyes of the gods, in order to free society from their evils. Both the hybrid and monstrous creatures appear to symbolise the forces that threaten civilisation, presented by the gods and conquerable only by heroes. Hybrids can range from savage centaurs to beautiful mermaids, and in a reflection of the changing temperament of nature, those which might at first seem beautiful and enticing like the sirens and mermaids, can prove treacherous and fatal upon closer inspection. In an exploration of roles played by monstrous and hybrid creatures we expose society's need for a manifestation of evil that can be defeated, a basis of control where in a Greek society the gods can bring order to chaos and make sense of the evils in the world, be in morality or in the violence of nature. Without them there would be nothing for the heroes to conquer, and the function of the mythology would break down. Hybrid and monstrous creatures are perhaps some of the most intriguing aspects of mythology, capturing the imaginations of many throughout time. What makes them so fascinating is different from one individual to the next, but when theorising one might be able to attribute their allure to that which sets them apart from humans, the fantasy aspect of their existence. Many characters in mythology are either human or human-like in appearance (the gods) and although did not exist, because of their physical manifestation being in human form could potentially have existed at some point. Monsters and hybrids are very much creations of fantasy, products of the imagination that certainly do not exist, and so the possibilities and scope of their functions limitless. They can materialise in the imagination of a person in any way that person desires, fulfilling the function that that person requires of it. Humans are by their nature fascinated with things that are different to themselves, and the intrigue of something so physically alien embodies the oxymoron of an attraction to the exotic, a difference which simultaneously acts as a barrier. The variety of different perceptions of these creatures mirrors the variety of roles that they can be said to play in Greek myths. One of the roles of hybrid and monstrous creatures can be attributed, on a basic level, to the structure of a myth. The hero, in order to prove his heroic strength and achieve his quest, must overcome a series of obstacles, more often than not in the form of some kind of monster. We see this in Homer's epic The Odyssey, where he needs to pass by the monsters Scylla and Charybdis, and he must save him and his men from the Cyclops, the myth of Theseus and the minotaur (half man half bull), in Heracles' Twelve Labours particularly with the destruction of the Nemean Lion, a beast who had "made all the mountain district unsafe", and thus must restore the district's safety. Without the obstacles the hero cannot prove himself to be heroic. In a similar way, if we look at the monsters as slightly more than mere obstacles and regard them as a manifestation of evil or chaos, without them the heroes cannot triumph and bring order, and subsequently the myths would not work as allegoric tales. The monsters and hybrids fulfil the roles of opposition to the good and virtuous forces in the world, and give the heroes cause to show their heroism. <fnote>(Kerenyi 1959:140) </fnote>Another role that can be attributed to hybrid and monstrous creatures is providing a direct antithesis of the hero of a myth. They can be used in a representation of good versus evil in its most basic form. The hero's virtue can be emphasised by juxtaposing him against a foil, a demonstration of the battle of one good force against one evil force. This theory can be demonstrated through Odysseus' encounters with the monsters Scylla and Charybdis in Homer's Odyssey. Scylla, the monster with a ring of dog's heads round her middle, and Charybdis, the whirlpool, are simplistic embodiments of malevolence, included within the story as obstacles to be defeated. Their violence contrasted against the terror and innocence of Odysseus and his crew who have done nothing to incur their wrath than cross their paths, brings into relief Odysseus' comparative virtue. If we consider Odysseus' episode with the Cyclops, Polyphemus, we can see an illustration of this theory. Odysseus and his men are held captive in his cave, and the Cyclops plans to systematically eat everybody in an act of barbarity. The Cyclops is being presented as evil and immoral and sharply contrasts Odysseus, bringing to light both his heroism and morality. If we were to consider the situation in a little more depth it would become obvious that the Cyclops, despite being naturally immoral, is acting on anger stemming from Odysseus abusing xenia, a code of hospitality, where Odysseus has intruded upon his home and eaten his food in Polyphemus' absence. This is an example of a hybrid exhibiting human characteristics, perhaps using such a creature to reflect the immoralities and vices of man. Perhaps the monsters and hybrids can be seen as a personification of moral perversity through physical hideousness and abnormality. Many of these beings are unsightly creatures, and are perhaps an ancient society's way of personifying the evils that surrounded them; a physical manifestation of immorality, disease and natural disasters. When considering monsters and hybrids in conjunction with divinity, it becomes apparent that the gods can use them as vehicles of control over mortal society. The gods create these creatures as manifestations of chaos, and are able to bring order and peace to the world in an act of control over the mortal realm. The hero is typically aided through divine intervention thus showing the need for a higher power to civilise and bring order. Paradoxically, the gods can be shown to be almost as bad as the creatures themselves in many instances, exhibiting acts of random barbarity and violence, and being exposed to human emotion and vices. The gods are subject to jealousy and rage, for example Poseidon, who wreaks havoc upon Odysseus' fleet, conjuring up vicious storms and causing the death of members of his crew: <quote>"Poseidon...so violently at odds with you... puts all these disasters in your path." (Book 5, p71)</quote>Similarly Zeus, father of the gods, is subject to immoral lust, and rapes many mortal women, for example Semele, the mother of Dionysus. In realisation of the gods' own weaknesses and immorality, the paradox of their superiority over mortal society and their use of monsters and hybrids, of which they are often no better, become clear. Some of the hybrid and monstrous creatures have been victims of the whims of the gods. Scylla, the terrifying monster that Odysseus is faced with on his wanderings, is subject to the lusts and jealousies of the divine. Once the beautiful daughter of Phorcys and Hecate, it is said that she was transformed by Amphitrite, the jealous wife of Poseidon, after he had made advances to her. A slightly different version is detailed in Ovid's Metamorphoses, in which a jealous Circe transforms her, after Glaucus, the man she falls in love with, falls in love with Scylla. Either way, Scylla becomes a monster as a result of the weaknesses of the gods, and is a victim of jealousy. Similarly "fair cheeked" Medusa, the gorgon killed by the hero Perseus, whose head was wreathed in snakes and could turn a man to stone with one look, was a beautiful woman made that way by Athena as a punishment of having been raped by Poseidon. She is made a monster as a result of the lust of the gods, and is perhaps even beheaded as a result of jealousy over beauty: <quote>"It is alleged by some that Medusa was beheaded for Athena's sake; and they say that the gorgon was fain to match herself with the goddess even in beauty."</quote><fnote>(Garber 2003:25) </fnote>In these instances they appear as sympathetic characters who are at the disposal of the gods, reflecting the equal helplessness of mortals. In contrast with the current theme of the essay, some of the hybrids exhibit signs of virtue, and play the role of bringing relief to mortals. Take Pan for example, a hybrid god who is half man and half goat bearing resemblance to Satyrs. He favours music and dancing, and in the Homeric Hymn to Pan is described as "delight[ing] the hearts of them all." Similarly there is Dionysus, the god of wine, music, and revelry, who is always accompanied by a band of Satyrs, hybrid creatures who are half human and half goat and horse. The Satyrs encourage festivities by their very nature: <quote>"They dance and sing and love music; they make wine and drink it, and they are in a perpetual state of sexual excitement."</quote><fnote>(Morford 2007:311) </fnote>They provide the basis for mortal enjoyment; promoting drinking, merriment and pleasure, alleviating the toils and troubles of everyday existence. Conversely, all three embody immorality to a certain extent, and are given to wild mood swings which can involve terrible and devastating violence. The duality of these characters is illustrated in Euripides' Bacchae, where there is imagery of joyous "devour[ing] of raw flesh", Satyrs in "their frenzy" and animals and humans being "torn to pieces...flesh stripped from their bodies." There is a dark side to these creatures who can so readily bring happiness. In conclusion, I believe that the roles played by hybrid and monstrous creatures are those of portraying evil and immorality in physical form, enabling heroic display, and providing a channel through which the gods can be seen to bring order and control to chaos. Despite, seeming superficially to be a mere paradigm of iniquity and violence, the creatures' duality in many cases indicate their reflection of human nature and the natural world, and even prove them to be forces for good on occasion. Brought into being perhaps by society's need to explain and understand immorality and the threatening forces of the world through physical object, they are manifestations of human vice, woven into fables in which most often the virtue of the civilised conquers them. 