The Women of Trachis (one of Sophocles' less revered plays) was first performed sometime around the third quarter of the fifth century BC. It centres on Deianeira, a female character who though not weak, is one of the most feminine and virtuous tragic heroines. Women were usually represented through Athenian drama either as strong and powerful characters, maddened by the conflict of their passions, and driven by revenge (for example Medea in Euripides' Medea, or Clytemnestra in Aeschylus' Agamemnon). Or as more docile models of the traditional expectations of women (such as Chrysothemis in Sophocles' Electra) who are tragically flawed with the natural defect of femininity (Phaedra in Euripides' Hippolytus). Both avenues seem set to highlight the shortcomings of the female gender, but as all sources written with regard to women are solely by men for a predominantly male audience, there is some sense in that women were regarded as inferior and the possibility of their strength was something to be feared. <fnote>(Carawan 1974:189) </fnote>Knowing exactly how fifth century Athenian women felt and behaved is impossible, as all sources alluding to women and the view towards them were written by men, and thus lacking a women's perspective on the reality of their world. Greek drama, ancient pottery and legal archives can shed light to a certain extent the attitude held towards them by men. Freeman puts forward the suggestion that although it is commonly believed the seclusion of women within the home was total, in comedy and tragedy women are portrayed outside the house. Cohen suggests that despite the view that most women would never step out of their threshold, men were aware of women's daily activities outside the home. Deianeira remains inside her household at all times however, giving the robe to Lichas to deliver to Heracles, and sending her son Hyllus to find him rather than to go herself. She is portrayed as a virtuous and respectable woman in this sense, and fulfils the expectations of how a reputable woman should behave.  <fnote>(Freeman 1999:177-8) </fnote><fnote>(Cohen 1989:3-4) </fnote>The expectations of a woman centred largely on the belief that women were the inferior gender. Their primary function was to get married and bear sons, and they would ideally feel a strong sense of family loyalty. Freeman details the nature of marriages, claiming that 'The most important moment of transition in a women's life was marriage." 4 Love played little part in the arrangement of marriages, however a strong loyalty to the husband should be present. 4 This is illustrated in Women of Trachis, as although Heracles had claimed Deianeira through violence, and the marriage had been made without love, Deianeira had developed a loyalty and in her own way a love for her husband, or at least a desire to keep him for herself. In providing Heracles with many children she has well fulfilled her role as a wife, but despite her being portrayed as such an admirable example of womanhood, she still cannot ultimately prevent the downfall of her and her husband. <fnote></fnote><fnote></fnote>An ideal woman would be quiet, controlled and demure although women were always regarded as foolish and emotional, and thus were rarely expected to adhere to the ideal. Women were generally viewed as very feminine, with stereotypical activities and mannerisms flanking this view of girlish femininity. There were places within the household especially for sewing and weaving, activities which are distinctly feminine. Deianeira exhibits femininity in this way, but paradoxically it culminates in Heracles' death, a contrastingly masculine action. However, every aspect of the murder of her husband is done in a feminine way: it is accidental - a tragic, but very feminine mistake borne through her womanly desires and naivety (and perhaps in Athenian perspective typical female stupidity) in believing that the Centaur might try to help her despite her having been the reason for his demise; it is committed by means of a poisoned garment she has made for him (the making of it is in itself a feminine action) where both the use of poison and the deception involved in the attempt to trick him into wanting her are distinctive feminine actions; the motivation behind his death is that of love, or more importantly jealous desire, both emotions Athenians would have considered feminine. It would have been expected that a women would be subject to jealousy and desire when her sexual life was under threat by another. Freeman states that 'women's sexual desires were assumed (by men) to be strong." 4 A view supported by the dismayed reaction of the chorus women in Lysistrata when one proposes that they should deny the men sex in order to get their way. Similarly it would appear that the Athenians expected women to be highly emotional, and were 'subject to particularly strong and threatening feelings and that suppression of their instincts by men was justified through fear of the emotional havoc they could wreak." 4 In all examples of Greek Tragedy it is evident that the Greeks saw women as prone to intense emotion, something which can be exploited in Greek drama to expose the fears of men. 4 <fnote>(Freeman 1999:180-1) </fnote><fnote></fnote><fnote></fnote><fnote>4 (Freeman 1999:180-1) </fnote>The fact that the women featured in tragedy are not Athenian and indeed may not even be Greek, allows a playwright to convey a message that could easily apply to Athens within the safety of a context similar enough to relate to but distant enough to avoid public outcry. Similarly characters of tragedy are mythical rather than historical figures. Because of this the flaws associated with women could be exaggerated, and more outrageous behaviour can be expected from them; the Athenians would probably have felt superior to many other civilisations and as such would have expected more outrageous behaviour as an example of how dangerous women could become if left unchecked and uncontrolled. Many female characters of tragedy subvert traditional expectations of women, exhibiting masculine characteristics and are strong, powerful forces of destruction (like Medea and Clytemnestra). In this way, perhaps Greek tragedy is more a representation of how women could become, rather than how women were expected to be. The fundamental belief that the purpose of women was to bear sons seems to hold fast through all societies. There do, however, seem to be slight differences in the limitations on the women's lives from place to place, which could effect the expectations of the Athenian audience of the female characters. Freeman indicates that Spartan women for example, enjoyed a greater freedom than Athenian women. The men of Sparta, automatically drafted into military service and away from home would be leaving the women to their own devices. This can be seen in Aristophanes' Lysistrata. <fnote>(Freeman, 1999:181-2) </fnote>Setting tragedies in a distant country (like Sparta) could have changed the audience's expectations of female representation. When watching drama set in a scenario where women are given more freedom (as in Sparta) the dangers of their nature can be allowed to be exploited. Instead of the typical, traditional woman, the playwright can present his audience with a much stronger woman. The audience would get used to seeing women represented in such a way. In Women of Trachis however, (which is set a little closer to home, in Northern Greece) Deianeira is less of a calculated murderess, and more of a feminine character, and can be shown much more to be a representative fifth century female, despite her not being Athenian. Thus those in the audience expecting to see a vengeance-crazed woman driven mad by jealousy would instead be presented with a gentle and submissive manifestation of womanhood.  <fnote>(Haigh, 1896:188-91) </fnote>Deianeira describes the piteous lives of women and relates it to her own torments, describing girlhood as a young plant living in sheltered regions, free to live an untainted and pleasurable life, and then the sudden leap into adulthood where marriage introduces troubles of the night. Her monologue details her fears for her husband and children, a distinctly feminine train of thought, and her frightening loss of innocence. She can relate the life of women back to her own story, which further highlights the misfortunes of females. The fight between the river Achelous and Heracles is an intimidating display of masculinity which contrasts starkly with Deianeira's femininity and innocence as she crosses into adulthood. She was fought over to be claimed as a bride, and was also molested by the centaur, Nessus, as a result of her beauty, and her terror reflects well on traditional Greek views of femininity. Similarly, as she tells how men will always stray as soon as one beauty gets old and a new one comes along. She relates this to her own situation, and yet she cannot find it in herself to be angry at Heracles. She accepts it, which is the mark of a good woman. However, instead of anger she is filled with a jealous desire, which causes just as much damage, albeit in innocence. Neither is she angry at Iole, who is the cause of her anguish albeit, again, in innocence and unfortunate circumstances. Deianeira's immediate suicide and deep shame as a response to her husband's death indicate a sense of honour which mirrors that of Athenian ideals. Although the women of the play are not the powerful, blood-thirsty women representing women in most drama, these women still represent an expected view of Athenian women; one of noble strength and flawed idealism.  <fnote>(Kraus, 1974:75-81) </fnote>Desire is a theme which recurs in Greek drama. Female desire is said to be the cause of many problems, and it is the strength of the female sexuality which is the cause for social damage within the plays. Men would have to restrain the sexuality in order to protect society from destruction. It is Deianeira's desire which causes many of the problems within the Women of Trachis. She is struck with desire for her husband and cannot bare the thought of him sharing their bed with another woman. Goldhill examined how desire is a sure way to doom in tragedy: 'Every woman who expresses sexual desire, even for their husband, causes the violent destruction of the household'. Deianeira's excessive want for her husband reflects the common view of women's imperfections and as such shows that she fits the expectations of a fifth century Athenian woman. Contrastingly Iole's lack of desire for sexual contact with Heracles, indeed her complete refusal to communicate with anyone, indicates her nobility, and casts her in a good light. This portrayal of women is surprising and unexpected in comparison to other tragedies. <fnote>(Freeman 1999:12) </fnote><fnote>(Goldhill 2004:52) </fnote>In conclusion, I believe that yes, the women in Women of Trachis are portrayed in a way that a fifth century Athenian audience would have expected, as Deianeira behaves predominantly in the way any respectable Athenian should, and is subject to the standard flaws that they would expect women to fall pray to, although admittedly she's not the typical powerful, sinning tragic heroine. She exhibits behaviour classically associated to that of women in Greek society: she is a concerned mother, loyal and passionate wife, and frightened by the violence surrounding her marriage. Her tragic error was a foolish, feminine mistake borne out of jealousy and desire, typical traits associated with women in Ancient Athens. However, despite her femininity, she is not a weak character, as she has the strength and dignity to kill herself, she inverts the gender roles between her and Heracles as he weeps like a woman, and however unwittingly and unwillingly, she kills a man who could be killed by no other male. Iole is silent and respectful, and the nurse (more surprisingly) is wise and helpful. Despite erring, all the women are portrayed in quite a good light with gentle pathos, which is slightly unusual for a Greek Tragedy, but their faults are still very much that of women, and as such fit the profile of Athenian expectation. 