The hierarchical structure of ancient Greece with regards to sexuality between mortals and gods alike is lead by the elevated status of the gods. The gods are not bound by mortal morality and as such can do as they please, and within the divine structure Zeus as the father of the gods, retains dominance over the other divinities. We must analyse the myths involving sexual encounters and interpret them, and decide whether or not they are reflections of social concerns, taking for granted that the myths detailing rape and/or abduction will examine hierarchies of power and status by default. Zeitlin certainly suggests that the former is possible: <quote>"Myths...explore and express the complexity of cultural norms, values and preoccupations...raise questions especially about nature, the universe and the gods...family, society and the 'human condition'". </quote><fnote>(Tomaselli 1986:124) </fnote>When exploring social concerns, I am referring to the role of women in Greek society, and the attitude of men towards them. The women's desire (or lack thereof in the majority of cases) to be involved in these sexual encounters are rarely considered; in such a patriarchal society the focus is on attempting to demonstrate masculine superiority, engaging the ideals of the male being the active subject, and the female the passive object. One must bear in mind when examining the myths, however, that there is not one definitive interpretation of a myth, and that one must consider the media through which the myth is being communicated. The interpretation of the sexual encounter in each particular instance will depend on the artist and the person responding to the media.  <fnote>(Morford 2007:21) </fnote>An example of rape within divinity is Hades abduction of the daughter of the goddess Demeter, Persephone. Hades kidnaps her and takes her by force to the underworld despite her protestations, and as such is fairly simple to identify as a rape as opposed to another form of sexual encounter. This would suggest that Zeus (who approved the match) and Hades where in possession of high status in this instance, leading the hierarchy because of their rank as divine kings, and as men. Morford and Lenardon propose that "a religious artist or critic might maintain that god's will is god's will, and it was divinely ordained to have Hades and Persephone as king and queen of the Underworld." The rape also teaches about social concerns, in reflection to that of forced marriage, providing a "cultural archetype of marriage as a forcible abduction". This rape reflects how a female can have no control over who she is married to, and highlights the development from maiden to woman, the death of childhood and the birth of adulthood at the loss of virginity. This is forced upon Persephone but is taken as Hades' right, and she must just accept it. Ovid describes the speed of the rape as "breathtaking", in his Metamorphoses, and Curren relates this to hierarchies of power: <fnote>(Morford 2007:21) </fnote><fnote>(Tomaselli 1986:270) </fnote><quote>"At other times rape is instantaneous in order to demonstrate the helplessness of woman in the face of overwhelming male superiority."</quote><fnote>(Peradotto 1984:266) </fnote>The account of this rape in the Homeric Hymn to Demeter clearly describes the nature of Hades' attack on Persephone; catching her unawares he "sprang upon her...caught hold of her, protesting...weeping...then she screamed in a shrill voice...no one heard". This is not presented as Hades' divine right as is often accepted of divinity, but more so as a brutal rape, and as a contemporary source suggests a contemplation of the distressing nature of such an act. This is largely un-sustained however, as most women (for example Semele, Dionysus' mother, who was 'raped' ((although even this is debatable)) by Zeus) are treated with disdain and often disowned after having been involved with sexual relations, desired or otherwise. In contrast to sexual encounter amongst divinity, that of the two mortals Paris and Helen is portrayed in completely different light. Helen may claim to have been taken by force in her defence of her actions in Euripides' Women of Troy, and sometimes their affair is referred to as 'The Rape of Helen', but Homer writes her in the Iliad as "her heart having quickened as she looked at him", clearly demonstrating a connection between them be it love or lust, which does not support her having not acquiesced to the affair. She consistently refers to herself as "bitch that I am", "whore that I am", "slut that I am", throughout the Iliad, and it becomes clear that she views herself as being in the wrong, not suggestive of having been raped or taken against her will. Suggestions of abduction arise in the instances in which she tries to defend herself, and can be seen as defensive manipulations of the truth. This further supports the idea that interpretation of a situation is key to defining what is rape and what is not, and how it is more often than not merely a matter of opinion. <quote>"The designation of the seduction/abduction of Helen by Paris as the 'Rape of Helen' was established at a time when the word 'rape' did not necessarily have the narrow, sole connotation it has today, that of a brutal, forceful sexual act against an unwilling partner." </quote><fnote>(Morford 2007:21) </fnote>In this example, from a social point of view, we can observe the severe male bias against the female. Helen shoulders much of the blame amongst the peoples of Troy and Greece; not Helen and Paris, and not the gods. The most common form of sexual assault found in mythology is between that of male gods and human females. Apollo's attempted rape of the nymph Daphne causes a metamorphosis; in her attempt to escape Apollo's attentions she asks to have her beauty destroyed to retain her virginity, and in answer of her prayer she is turned into a Laurel tree. Apollo, still in love with her, takes its leaves and wreathes his hair with them. In bitter reflection of the blame that is unfairly given to women because of their inferiority, "Daphne curses her beauty because it has made her too desirable." Women are raised on the principal that if something happens to them they must have done something to provoke it: <fnote>(Peradotto 1984:271) </fnote><quote>"There are few from whom the victim can expect sympathy or comfort. She and not the rapist is the one who must bear the injury, the guilt, society's blame, and the punishment." </quote><fnote>(Peradotto 1984:271) </fnote>This can be supported by two similar example involving a metamorphosis. One is that of Caenis and Poseidon. She is raped by Poseidon and granted one wish; that she may be transformed into a man so that she may never again be penetrated and escape her fate as a woman, so becoming invulnerable. She is still killed however; she is crushed beneath falling rocks. Io suffers both under the rape of Zeus and a subsequent punishment from a jealous Hera, who turns her into a cow tormented forever by a gadfly: <quote>"Ovid subordinates the physical discomforts of Io's new life as a heifer to her psychological suffering...her ludicrous appearance expresses the humiliation and mortification to which the raped are subject...like a woman in a small town who must endure the stares of all in their knowledge that she has been raped." </quote><fnote>(Peradotto 1984:272) </fnote>A rather unusual manifestation of rape is Aphrodite's seduction of the mortal Anchises in a Homeric Hymn. She disguises herself as a "young virgin" and convinces him to sleep with her. Afterwards she reveals her true identity, and he begs her to make him an immortal, for "no man retains his full strength who sleeps with an immortal goddess." It brings to the fore the issue of status; a man must never be in a passive position against a woman or else he becomes "enfeebled", and in this instance he has been involved in a submissive sexual encounter as a goddess is a superior being. The gods and goddesses may behave as they wish, and mortals must submit to their will. In conclusion, I believe the mythic accounts of various rape or sexual encounter highlight both hierarchies of power, reflecting the status of the gods and their ability to do as they please, and other social concerns, detailing the position of women and their unjust acceptance of the blame that should otherwise belong to the gods. They teach of the punishments inflicted upon the victims, and how they must bear the guilt that should be reserved for the attacker. The nature of interpretation of what is and what is not rape is also brought to the fore. 