<heading>Refrigeration</heading>Refrigeration is defined as the elimination of heat from a material at a temperature higher than the temperature of its surroundings. The mechanism of refrigeration is a part of the freezing process and freezing storage involved in the thermodynamic aspects of freezing. According to the second law of thermodynamics, heat only flows from higher to lower temperatures. Therefore, in order to raise the heat from a lower to a higher temperature level, expenditure of work is needed. The aim of industrial refrigeration processes is to eliminate heat from low temperature points towards points with higher temperature. For this reason, either closed mechanical refrigeration cycles in which refrigeration fluids circulate, or open cryogenic systems with liquid nitrogen (LIN) or carbon dioxide (CO 2), are commonly used by the food industry. The main elements in a closed mechanical refrigeration system are the condenser, compressor, evaporator, and the expansion valve. The refrigerants hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) and ammonia are examples of the refrigerants circulated in these types of mechanical refrigeration systems. A simple scheme for the closed mechanical refrigeration system is shown in the Figure below. <figure/><heading>Freezing </heading>Freezing is the unit operation in which temperature of a food is reduced below the freezing point, and a proportion of the water undergoes a change in state to form ice crystals. The safety and nutrition quality of frozen products are emphasized when high quality raw materials are used, good manufacturing practices are employed in the preservation process, and the products are kept in accordance with specified temperatures. The immobilisation of water to ice and the resulting concentration of dissolved solutes in unfrozen water lower the activity of the food. Preservation is achieved by (a) a combination of low temperatures (b) reduced water activity (c) in some foods, pre-treatment by blanching. During freezing, sensible heat is first removed to lower the temperature of a food to the freezing point. Heat produced by respiration is also removed. This is termed as the heat load. It is important in determining the correct size of the freezing equipment. Water has a high specific heat (4200kg -1K -1) and a high latent heat of fusion (335kJ kg -1). A substantial amount of energy is needed to freeze foods. The International Institute of Refrigeration (IIR) has provided definitions to establish a basis for the freezing process. According to their definition, the freezing process is basically divided into three stages based on major temperature changes in a particular location in the product, as shown in Figures 1 and 2 for pure water and food respectively. <figure/><figure/>Beginning with the prefreezing stage, the food is subjected to the freezing process until the appearance of the first crystal. If the material frozen is pure water, the freezing temperature will be 0 °C and, up to this temperature, there will be a sub cooling until the ice formation begins. In the case of foods during this stage, the temperature decreases to below freezing temperature and, with the formation of the first ice crystal, increases to freezing temperature. The second stage is the freezing period; a phase change occurs, transforming water into ice. For pure water, temperature at this stage is constant; however, it decreases slightly in foods, due to the increasing concentration of solutes in the unfrozen water portion. The last stage starts when the product temperature reaches the point where most freezable water has been converted to ice, and ends when the temperature is reduced to storage temperature (Persson and Lohndal, 1993). <heading>Blanching</heading>Blanching is the exposure of the vegetables to boiling water or steam for a brief period of time to inactivate enzymes. The objective of blanching is to inactivate the enzymes causing detrimental changes in colour, odour, flavour, and nutritive value, but heat treatment causes loss of such characteristics in fruits (Gutschmidt, 1968). Therefore, only a few types of fruits are blanched for inactivation of enzymes prior to freezing. The loss of water-soluble minerals and vitamins during blanching should also be minimized by keeping blanching time and temperature at an optimum combination (Spiess, 1984). Practically every vegetable (except herbs and green peppers) needs to be blanched and promptly cooled prior to freezing, since heating slows or stops the enzyme action, which causes vegetables to grow and mature. After maturation, however, enzymes can cause loss in quality, flavour, colour, texture, and nutrients. If vegetables are not heated sufficiently, the enzymes will continue to be active during frozen storage and may cause the vegetables to toughen or develop off-flavours and colours. Blanching also causes wilting or softening of vegetables, making them easier to pack. It destroys some bacteria and helps remove any surface dirt (Desrosier and Tressler, 1977). Blanching in hot water at 70 to 105 °C has been associated with the destruction of enzyme activity. Blanching is usually carried out between 75 and 95 °C for 1 to 10 minutes, depending on the size of individual vegetable pieces (Holdsworth, 1983). Blanched vegetables should be promptly cooled down to control and minimize the degradation of soluble and heat-labile nutrients (Deitrich et al., 1977). The enzymes used as indicators of effectiveness of the blanching treatment are peroxidase, catalase, and more recently lipoxygenase. Peroxidase inactivation is commonly used in vegetable processing, since peroxidase is easily detected and is the most heat stable of these enzymes (Arthey, 1993). Vegetables can be blanched in hot water, steam, and in the microwave. Hot water blanching is the most common way of processing vegetables. Blanching times for various vegetables can vary depending on the intended product use. For water blanching, vegetables are put in a basket and then placed in a kettle of boiling water covered with a lid. Steam blanching takes longer than the water method, but helps retain water-soluble nutrients such as water-soluble vitamins. For steam blanching, a single layer of vegetables is placed on a rack or in a basket at 3-5 cm above water boiling in a kettle. A tightly fitted lid is placed on the kettle and timing is started. Microwave blanching is usually recommended for small quantities of vegetables prior to freezing. Due to the non-uniform heating disadvantage of microwaves, research is still being conducted to obtain better results with microwave blanching. Tests for catalase and polyphenol oxidase activity were tested after blanching by using Guaicol. If it is active it goes brown .Some vegetable were even sulphited by using zero, 0.1% and 0.5% sodium metabisulphite solution for 5 minutes. The results were summarised and tabulated as follows: <table/>In blanching we observed that, 2 minutes in soft water was better than hard water at the same time. Hard water at 2 minutes better than 5 minutes in hard water. This observation was not made depending on the quantitative data obtained. <heading>Core temperatures of fruit and vegetables before freezing </heading><table/>3 tomatoes were splitted into halves and kept on an empty tray for vacuum freezing. The weight of those 3 tomatoes were 251.60. The temperatures of the six halves of tomatoes were as follows before freezing. <table/>Tomatoes consist of 94% water. After vacuum freezing the temperature ranges between -1 to 4˚C. <heading>Vacuum freezing results </heading><table/>Some types of freezers used in freezing are as follows: Blast freezers -Air is recirculated over food at between -30˚ C and -40˚ C at velocity of 1.5- 6.0ms-1. The higher velocity reduces the thickness of the boundary films surrounding the food and thus increases the heat transfer coefficient. It is relatively economical and highly flexible in that foods of different shapes and sizes can be frozen. However, the large volume of recycled air can cause freezer burn and oxidative changes to unpackaged or IQF foods. A few fruits and vegetables were blanched and blast frozen during the experiment. After 45 minutes of Blast freezing the temperature was as follows. <table/>Plate Freezers - consists of a vertical or horizontal series of hollow plates, through which refrigerant is pumped at -40˚C. They may be batch, semi continuous or continuous in operation. Flat or relatively thin foods are placed in single layers between the plates. A slight pressure is applied by moving he plates together. This improves the contact between surfaces of food and the plates there by increases the rate of heat transfer. This type of freezers has been used in the fishing industry to freeze "fish blocks" which had been used to make value- added fish products like fish fingers, nuggets etc. <heading>Liquid Nitrogen freezers</heading>Liquid nitrogen, with a boiling temperature of -196 °C at atmospheric pressure, is a by-product of oxygen manufacture. The refrigerant is sprayed into the freezer and evaporates both on leaving the spray nozzles and on contact with the products. The system is designed in a way that the refrigerant passes in counter current to the movement of the products on the belt giving high transfer efficiency. The refrigerant consumption is in the range of 1.2-kg refrigerant per kg of the product. This rapid surface freezing also offers advantages to the processor in terms of ease of handling (particularly for fragile or sensitive food products) or further processing. Typical food products used in this system are fish fillets, seafood, fruits, berries (Persson and Lohndal, 1993). <heading>Freezing time</heading>The freezing time and freezing rate are the most important parameters in designing freezing systems. The quality of the frozen product is mostly affected by the rate of freezing, while time of freezing is calculated according to the rate of freezing. For industrial applications, they are the most essential parameters in the process when comparing different types of freezing systems and equipment (Persson and Lohndal, 1993). Freezing time is one of the most important parameters in the freezing process, defined as time required to lower product temperature from its initial temperature to a given temperature at its thermal center. Since the temperature distribution within the product varies during freezing process, the thermal center is generally taken as reference. Thus, when the geometrical center of the product reaches the given final temperature, this ensures the average product temperature has been reduced to a storage value. Freezing time depends on several factors, including the initial and final temperatures of the product and the quantity of heat removed, as well as dimensions (especially thickness) and shape of product, heat transfer process, and temperature. The International Institute of Refrigeration (1986) defines various factors of freezing time in relation to both the product frozen and freezing equipment (Persson and Lohndal, 1993). The most important are: <list>Dimensions and shape of product, particularly thicknessInitial and final temperaturesTemperature of refrigerating mediumSurface heat transfer coefficient of productChange in enthalpyThermal conductivity of product</list>Calculation of freezing time in food systems is difficult in comparison to pure systems since the freezing temperature changes continuously during the process. Using a simplified approach, time elapsed between initial freezing until when the entire product is frozen can be regarded as the freezing time. Plank's equation is commonly used to estimate freezing time, however due to assumptions involved in the calculation it is only useful for obtaining an approximation of freezing time. The derivation of the equation starts with the assumption the product being frozen is initially at freezing temperature. Therefore, the calculated freezing time represents only the freezing period. The equation can be further modified for different geometries including slab, cylinder, and sphere, where for each geometry, the coefficients are arranged in relation to the dimensions (Plank, 1980). Plank's equation was used to calculate the freezing time of an apple using liquid nitrogen.  FORMULA  The maximum time to freeze the apple using liquid nitrogen was 2.51 minutes.  FORMULA  The minimum time to freeze the apple using liquid nitrogen was 70.5 seconds. <heading>Freezing rate</heading>The freezing rate (°C/h) for a product or package is defined as the ratio of difference between initial and final temperature of product to freezing time. At a particular location within the product, a local freezing rate can be defined as the ratio of the difference between the initial temperature and desired temperature to the time elapsed in reaching the given final temperature (Persson and Lohndal, 1993). The quality of frozen products is largely dependent on the rate of freezing (Ramaswamy and Tung, 1984). Generally, rapid freezing results in better quality frozen products when compared with slow freezing. If freezing is instantaneous, there will be more locations within the food where crystallization begins. In contrast, if freezing is slow, the crystal growth will be slower with few nucleation sites resulting in larger ice crystals. Large ice crystals are known to cause mechanical damage to cell walls in addition to cell dehydration. Thus, the rate of freezing for plant tissues is extremely important due to the effect of freezing rate on the size of ice crystals, cell hydration, and damage to cell walls (Rahman, 1999). The figure 4 shows a general behavior of the dynamics curve of freezing preservation. Rapid freezing is advantageous for freezing of many foods, however some products are susceptible to cracking when exposed to extremely low temperature for long periods. Several mechanisms, including volume expansion, contraction and expansion, and building of internal pressure, are proposed in literature explaining the mechanisms of product damage during freezing (Hung and Kim, 1996). <figure/>In small samples, high freezing rate produces a large number of ice crystals, in large samples, nucleation is only produced in the zone that is in contact with the refrigerant. The size of the ice crystals depend on freezing rate. Freezing damage is associated with ice formation, either directly through the mechanical effects produced by ice crystals or indirectly by an increase in solute concentration in the unfrozen phase. Physical changes in frozen foods include drip losses, moisture migration, freeze-cracking and ice crystallization. The growth in size of ice crystal can influence the damage during frozen storage and therefore lead to loss in quality. Recrysallisation at constant or fluctuating temperature occurs because systems tend to move toward a state of equilibrium where free energy is minimised. Chemical changes that can be detected during freezing and frozen storage are protein denaturation, lipid oxidation, enzymic browning, flavour deterioration, and degradation of pigments and vitamins. Formation of ice crystal can cause disruption in the frozen tissues, leading to the release of enzymes and chemical substances that affect food quality. All these physicochemical changes contribute to affecting the quality of food. 