<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>A platinum film resistance thermometer and a thermistor thermometer were calibrated over a range of temperature from 0 oC to 50 oC. The resistance of the platinum film resistance thermometer was found to have an approximately linear response to temperature over the tested range, with an error in predicted resistance of 0.02% or less of actual resistance. For this instrument the accuracy of the resistance meter used was found to be the limiting factor in the accuracy of the measurements taken. The resistance of the thermistor thermometer was found to approximately obey an inverse exponential relationship to temperature, with an error in predicted resistance of 1% or less of actual resistance. This uncertainty was proved to be the limiting factor on the accuracy of the instrument. </abstract><heading>Introduction</heading>Air temperature is a fundamental variable in meteorology, and so accurate measurement of temperature is of paramount importance. In some situations a liquid in glass thermometer is used for this measurement, but the need for a human observer to take the reading makes them unsuitable for remote or automated sensors. Resistance thermometers are therefore necessary for many applications, for example in radiosondes, having the advantage that their output can be logged electronically. The aim of this experiment is to compare the characteristics of two types of resistance thermometers, a platinum film and a thermistor. Pure metal thermometers have a resistance which increases with temperature. Platinum is the most commonly used metal, due to its stability and relatively linear response to temperature change. It has a temperature coefficient of 3.9 10 -3 K -1. (1) The low resistance of platinum can lead to the contact resistance in plugs and sockets becoming a factor which must be accounted for. Thermistor thermometers are semiconductors, whose resistance can either increase or decrease with temperature, depending on the materials used. The temperature coefficient of a thermistor is typically an order of magnitude larger than that of a pure metal. Thermistors are not as stable as platinum, and their temperature response is subject to a long term drift effect. Both instruments in this experiment will be calibrated, and their sensitivity over a range of atmospheric temperatures will be investigated. For the platinum film, the resistance increases with increasing temperature according to  FORMULA  where  and  are constants and R 0 is the sensor resistance at a reference temperature T 0 (measured in oC, and taken as zero here). For atmospheric temperatures the quadratic term is very much smaller than the linear term, so Equation 1a can be approximated to  FORMULA  where b = R 0 The thermistor used in this experiment has a resistance that decreases with increase in temperature, approximated by  FORMULA  where T is the temperature (measured in Kelvin), A is the characteristic resistance and B is the characteristic temperature. This equation is an approximation, and over the range -20 oC to 50 oC the error in the predicted resistance may be up to 5% of the actual resistance. To calibrate the thermistor a linear relationship between two variables is the most convenient. To achieve this, Equation 2a is rewritten by taking the logarithm of both sides, giving  FORMULA  A graph of ln(R) plotted against 1/T should therefore be a straight line. <heading>Experimental method</heading>The thermometers were both placed in an insulated water bath. A precision platinum resistance thermometer was used to provide the reference measurement of temperature, with an absolute accuracy better than ± 0.05 oC. Crushed ice was added to lower the water bath temperature to 0 oC. The temperature was then increased in approximately 5 oC steps, up to 50 oC and at each step the reference temperature was recorded and simultaneous readings taken from the platinum film and thermistor thermometers. <heading>Results</heading>Table 1 in Appendix 1 shows the results recorded during the experiment. A graph was plotted of resistance against temperature for the platinum film resistor (Graph 1). For the thermistor, the logarithm of resistance was plotted against the inverse of temperature (Graph 2). From Graph 1 it is possible to estimate the experimental values of R 0 and b in Equation 1b as  FORMULA  From Graph 2 the experimental values of B and ln(A) in Equation 2b can be estimated as  FORMULA  therefore  FORMULA  <figure/><figure/>To compare the agreement of Equation 2a with the experimental results, a graph was plotted of calculated values of resistance against temperature, and then the measured values overlaid on the same axes (see Graph 3). At all points the discrepancy is 1% or less between measured and calculated values. <figure/>Equation 1a was also fitted to the experimental results for the platinum film resistance thermometer, to determine if there is any detectable non-linear effect in the temperature response. This gave values for the coefficients of  FORMULA  The accuracy of Equation 1b compared to that of Equation 1a was investigated by examining the resistance residuals in each case. This data is shown in Table 2. Graph 4 shows a plot of the calculated residuals. It can be seen that the quadratic fit is slightly better than the linear fit. This difference is most marked at lower temperatures, but over normal atmospheric temperatures the linear fit is a good approximation. <figure/>By rearranging and differentiating Equation 2b it can be found that  FORMULA  Equation 2c gives the sensitivity of the thermistor. The sensitivity of the themistor can be calculated for a range of atmospheric temperatures, and from this the resolution can be found. The resolution of the multimeter used at this range was 1 Ω. It should be noted that the values for the thermistor resistance in Table 1 have only been quoted to an accuracy of 10 Ω, due to the rapid fluctuations in the reading at the time of measurement. These fluctuations were attributed to small local changes in temperature due to turbulence in the water bath. The thermistor was able to detect these fluctuations because of its small size and rapid response time. Assuming the multimeter is the only limit on resolution gives the values shown in Table 3. <table/>The resolution of the platinum film resistance thermometer can be calculated from the gradient of its calibration. In this case the resolution of the multimeter was 1 × 10 -3 Ω. Again assuming this to be the only limit on resolution gives a calculated resolution of 2.6 × 10 -3 K. Given that a multimeter has a typical accuracy of ± 0.1% on all resistance ranges, this uncertainty can be translated to an uncertainty in the temperature measurement of each instrument. For example, at 20 oC, in the platinum film resistance thermometer an uncertainty of ± 0.1% on the resistance reading gives an uncertainty of ± 0.3  oC. This is a much larger percentage error than that produced by the fitting the calibration. For the thermistor thermometer at 20 oC, an uncertainty of ± 0.1% on the resistance reading gives an uncertainty of ± 0.025  oC. This is a much smaller percentage error than the 1% uncertainty introduced by the calibration. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The instruments have both been shown to provide an accurate means of temperature measurement. In the case of the platinum film resistance thermometer the error in the measurement of its resistance is the most important factor, while for the thermistor thermometer the calibration fit introduces the largest uncertainty. The uncertainty caused by the experimental method was fairly small, resulting mainly from the different response times of the instruments, and slight fluctuations in the water bath temperature. Overall the method was satisfactory for determining the calibration of the instruments, and the experiment proved that both are sufficiently accurate for temperature measurements over the tested range. Further investigation would be required to determine how the accuracy of the calibration fits may be affected by temperatures outside the tested range. 