<abstract><heading>Abstract</heading>A series of 10 minute average wind speed measurements for various heights were used to produce a vertical wind profile close to the surface. A logarithmic wind profile was found to be a good approximation to the observed data. Calculated values of roughness length and friction velocity were found to vary significantly between readings. This was mainly attributed to changes in wind conditions and interference of surrounding terrain rather than atmospheric stability. </abstract><heading>Analysis</heading>Three sets of 10 minute average readings (A B and C) were taken from the pulse counter between 12:20 and 12:54. The logpro spreadsheet was used to convert the counter readings to wind speed, then produce plots of the vertical wind profile and wind speed against the logarithm of height. These plots are shown in Figure 1 for readings A, B and C. A linear trend was fitted to the log plots, and from the coefficients of these straight line equations, values were found for u* and z using the log wind profile equation. These values for each set of measurements are shown in Table 1. It can be seen that the log wind profile is a good fit to the measurements. Weather conditions were quite changeable while the measurements were being taken. Initially there were about 7 oktas of stratocumulus. This cloud became more broken during the course of the measurements, reducing to 3-4 oktas during the final 10 minutes. There was direct sunlight on the observing site shortly before the measurements were started, briefly measurement B and for most of measurement C. Grass temperature was <figure/><table/>initially 15 oC, fell to 11 oC at the start of B, rose to 14 oC at the start of C and peaked at 18 oC, before falling back to 14 oC. Wind speed, measured with a hand anemometer, was mostly in the range 1 to 3 ms -1, with occasional gusts up to 5ms -1. The wind direction was mostly westerly, occasionally veering south westerly. To the west of the observing site there was a distance of approximately 150 m of short grass, which was bounded by a number of trees. Roughness length for cut grass would be expected to be approximately 6 x 10 -3 m (Stull 1988). This is fairly consistent with the results obtained, with the roughness length calculated for A and B being slightly larger, and for C slightly smaller. The fetch of 150 m would only allow reliable measurements of the wind up to approximately 1.5 m above the surface. In this experiment the wind was measured up to 6.4 m above the surface, which may have caused the values for A and B to be larger. It can also be seen that each set of readings appears to have one slightly anomalous result which does not fit the logarithmic curve. In each case it is the measurement taken by the anemometer at 2.24 m height. This could indicate that this instrument is not functioning properly, but an alternative explanation could be that the wind above this height is being affected by the trees surrounding the observing site. This effect was tested by recalculating the log plot using first just the data up to 2.24 m, then just the data from 2.24 m upwards. This gave two new values each for u* and z, one for the lower wind and one for the upper wind. Data set C was used, and gave the values in Table 2. <table/>There is an increase in z 0 for the upper wind which would be expected if the trees are causing extra turbulence at that level. The height at which this effect is seen is within a reasonable range of what would be expected. Repeating the experiment with a different anemometer at 2.24 m would confirm whether this effect is genuine. It can be seen from Table 1 that the friction velocity of measurement A was larger than B and C, which were quite similar. The value of u* is dependant on wind speed, so this would be expected to be largest for A, were the average wind was stronger, and similar for B and C. The roughness length is largest for A and smallest for C. The log wind profile is only strictly valid in neutral conditions, so the most obvious explanation of these changes is that conditions were unstable for measurement A then became increasingly less unstable for B and C. However, this explanation is only partly supported by observation. There was direct sunlight on the observation site until shortly before the observations took place, so conditions may have been quite unstable initially. There was, however, much more direct sunlight during C than B, which should have led to more instability. There are also other factors which could have affected the amount of turbulence and hence the values of u* and z. A slight change in wind direction could have had an effect, by altering the fetch, or by causing the wind to blow over some of the other apparatus in the observing site. A roughness length of less than a centimeter would be easily affected in such circumstances. The teachpro spreadsheet was used to simulate vertical wind speed and temperature profiles, and investigate how these are affected by varying u* and T*. A larger value of u* gives a more rapidly increasing and larger wind speed. As wind speed increases, there is greater wind shear, and therefore more shear production of turbulence, and corresponding greater vertical momentum flux (u*). The overall stability of the profile is determined by T*. When T* is negative, sensible heat flux H is positive and temperature is highest at the surface, leading to unstable conditions. The wind speed tends towards a constant value as z increases (Figure 2a). When T* is very small, temperature is almost constant with height, meaning conditions are neutral, and H is very small. The wind profile is logarithmic (Figure 2b). As T* increases, H becomes negative and the temperature is reduced at the surface, giving stable conditions and a wind profile that becomes linear as z increases (Figure 2c). Data from the Penman mast were used to calculate the average surface sensible heat flux during the three sets of measurements that were taken. The Obukhov length L was then calculated. Due to the changing conditions during the experiment these values vary considerably, as can be seen from the results in Table 3. <figure/><table/>These calculations show that conditions were unstable during measurements A and C, and stable during B. The stability clearly does not have a large effect on the wind profile this close to the ground, as then a larger roughness length would be expected from C than B. Small variation in other conditions, such as the wind direction, must have had a larger effect on the observed value of z 0. <heading>Conclusion</heading>The experiment shows that the log profile is a good approximation of the vertical wind profile close to the surface. The values of u* and z 0 obtained were quite variable and dependent on local conditions of wind and terrain. Stability of the boundary layer was not found to have a large effect at the heights measured. This variability was much larger than any uncertainty in the measurements. The variability in the calculated values could be reduced by using a more open observing site with a longer fetch. 