<abstract><heading>SUMMARY</heading>The following paper presents the results of an Intensive Observation Period in which components of the surface energy balance are measured within a meteorological enclosure. Three experiments are used to quantify the surface energy balance. From this, values for the sensible heat flux density, latent heat flux density and Bowen Ratio are derived. The sensible heat flux density is estimated using two methods. The eddy correlation method calculated values of 69.8 Wm -2 and 40.0 Wm -2, whereas the profile method calculated values of 26.7 Wm -2 and 24.3 Wm -2. These values are used to calculate the latent heat flux density using the surface energy balance equation. It is found that the results attained are influenced with errors from many sources and that these errors are difficult to identify. The accuracy of the profile method is affected by strong temperature gradients existing near the Earth's surface. The accuracy of the eddy correlation method is reliant on sampling frequency, instrument lag and calibration accuracy of the instruments. The variations in atmospheric conditions and human error also introduce error into the calculated values. </abstract><heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>The Earth's surface and the overlying atmosphere are constantly exchanging energy between one another. The understanding of this dynamic process between the surface and atmosphere is of great importance. Energy is transferred via radiative components such as short-wave radiation and long-wave radiation, as well as non-radiative components, such as latent and sensible heat fluxes. The exchange of energy is what drives many processes on Earth, for instance, the growth of vegetation through photosynthesis and weathering of rock through diurnal temperature change. However, processes such as the heating of the air and ground and the changing state of water are crucial processes and need to be understood as they are key to understanding the physical mechanisms that directly affect the weather on a micro-scale and therefore weather forecasting. The exchange of energy occurs through four main processes; the absorption and emission of electromagnetic radiation; thermal conduction of heat within the ground; transfer of thermal energy directed away or towards the surface, the condensation of moisture in the atmosphere onto the surface or evaporation of water stored in the soil. These four processes collectively illustrate the surface energy exchange. To gain quantitative understanding of the surface energy exchange by these four processes, a representation of the surface energy balance is required. This will be made possible with the use of a variety of apparatus within a meteorological enclosure to measure radiative and non-radiative variables. The key objectives in this analysis of the surface energy balance are to derive values of the sensible heat flux density (H), the latent heat flux density (λE), and the Bowen Ratio (B0). The sensible heat flux is defined as the rate of heat absorbed or transmitted by a substance during a change of temperature which is not accompanied by a change of state ( URL ). Whereas, the latent heat flux is the rate of heat released or absorbed by the change of state of water into the atmosphere. The Bowen Ratio is simply defined as the ratio of sensible heating to latent heating. H, λE and B0 are fundamental variables and are very useful in analysing the exchange of energy at the Earth's surface. Values of H, λE and B0 were calculated using different methods and then a comparison is made of these values with respect to the method used. From this, the surface energy balance estimated by the different methods can be compared with their sources of error. In using different methods to calculate the same variable, it was found that different values were estimated, this was perhaps due to variations in the method, differing accuracies of the apparatus used, human error and possibly other sources of error. Therefore, this paper will take into account all probable sources of error, as well as the accuracies of H, λE and B0 and if possible, where such uncertainties arose from. The derived values for the sensible heat flux, latent heat flux and the Bowen Ration will then be related to the weather conditions present at the time of the experiments and whether the obtained results are what would be expected in such atmospheric conditions. This short paper represents key aspects of the surface energy balance examined during the morning of 19 th June 2006 within a meteorological enclosure. <heading>METHOD</heading>To gain an actual representation of the surface energy balance, an Intensive Observation Period (IOP) was carried out on 19 th June 2006 at 10:30AM. During this period, the necessary data was obtained. The IOP consisted of three experiments carried out simultaneously, with each experiment being duplicated using identical apparatus, producing six sets of data. (See IOP Results Summary Sheet in Appendix for complete results.) The first experiment measured the surface radiation budget. The second experiment measured sensible heat flux (H) by the eddy correlation method. The third experiment measured momentum and heat fluxes by the profile method. The key measurements acquired during the IOP were used to derive a set of surface energy exchange parameters which were then averaged over a common sampling period (length of the IOP). The sampling period was a duration of 20 minutes (1200s). From this, important surface energy balance variables were derived, in particular the sensible heat flux density, H, the latent heat flux density, λE and the Bowen Ratio, B0. The radiation balance is defined as the equilibrium between the amount of incident solar radiation received by the Earth, and the energy radiated into space (Dunlop. 2001). The first experiment calculated the radiation balance by using two solarimeters, one facing upwards, the other facing downwards. Additionally, a heat flux plate was buried beneath the surface. The mean voltage outputs of these apparatus were recorded by a switch box connected to voltage integrators. The values for down-welling short-wave radiation, S↓ (upward facing solarimeter) from the sun and up-welling short-wave radiation, S↑ (downward facing solarimeter) from the surface were calculated with respect to the sampling period of 20 minutes, along with the net long-wave irradiance, Ln and ground heat flux density G0. From this the net total surface irradiance, Rn was estimated. Where Rn = Sn + Ln and Sn = S↓- S↑ and Ln = L↓- L↑. Here, L indicates long-wave or terrestrial radiation. By using the values of H and λE, the Bowen Ratio B0, was calculated using B0 = (H/ λE ). Using the accuracies of each piece of apparatus (See Sheet in Appendix: Instrument Details and Calibrations Summer 2005), the error of each parameter and derived variable were calculated using a range of formulae. Although having completely different methods, the second and third experiments both obtain values for the sensible heat flux, H and the latent heat flux, λE in the meteorological enclosure. The second experiment measured H by the eddy correlation method. This method measures eddies near the surface. Eddies are turbulent fluctuations of 'blobs' of air with properties that differ from the mean properties of the surrounding atmosphere. By simultaneously measuring the vertical velocity by an upwards pointing Gill propeller anemometer and the temperature by a fine-wire platinum resistance thermometer at a height of 3m, at frequent intervals (every second) using the GENLOG computer program, an accurate value of H was estimated. By using the surface energy balance equation Rn - G - H - λE = 0 and using values of Rn and G obtained from the first experiment, a value of the surface latent heat flux, λE, was estimated. From this, the Bowen Ration was calculated using B0 = (H/ λE). Again, the errors and uncertainty in these values were calculated. The third and final experiment measured H and λE using the profile method. This method is somewhat different from the eddy correlation method in that instead of taking frequent measurements simultaneously of vertical velocity and temperature at a single point, measurements of the wind speed at eight points on a vertical mast and temperature at two heights are taken. The wind speed is recorded using eight anemometers mounted above each other on a mast, with the top anemometer at a height of 6.4m and the lowest anemometer at 0.56m. Each anemometer produces an electrical pulse at a rate which is proportional to its rotational speed. The total number of counts recorded for each anemometer is used to obtain a mean wind speed at that height over the length of the sampling period. By plotting a graph of the mean wind speed for each anemometer against a log-profile law approximation of the height of each anemometer, a straight line of best fit can be plotted. By using the gradient of the slope, a value for the friction velocity, u*, can be estimated. The friction velocity is defined as the frictional drag from the surface acting on horizontal winds at the Earth's surface. It acts in the opposite direction of the horizontal wind. The aerodynamic resistance, ra was then estimated by calculating the difference in velocity between z=0.2m and z=2.0m and using the value obtained for the frictional velocity, u* by using the equation ra = (U2-U1)/u*2, where (U2-U1) is the difference in velocity between z=0.2m and z=2.0m. The temperature is also measured at a height of z=0.2m and z=2.0m. Calculating the difference in temperature between these two heights and using the value for aerodynamic resistance, ra, a value for the sensible heat flux can be estimated by using the equation; H≈-ρ(cp/ra)(T2-T1), where ρ= density of air, c p=specific heat at constant volume and (T2-T1)=temperature difference between z=0.2m and z=2.0m. Since values of the ground heat flux and net surface irradiance were previously estimated in the first experiment, by using the surface energy balance equation, a value of the surface latent heat flux, λE, were estimated. Again the Bowen Ratio was calculated. Errors and uncertainties in the values derived by the third experiment will be stated and commented on. <heading>RESULTS</heading>The following section will present the results of the IOP carried out on 19 th June 2006. The IOP began at 10:30AM and lasted until 10:50AM and took place within a meteorological enclosure. The findings of the surface energy balance are summarized in table 1. <table/>It can be seen that the derived values for the net surface irradiance and ground heat flux for each group are not the same, even though each group carried out the experiments at the time (from 10:30AM to 10:50AM), under the same atmospheric conditions, using the same type of apparatus and using the same method and equations. When comparing the values for Rn and G0, not only are they not equal but when their uncertainties are considered, neither of the values are within range of the other values' uncertainty. This tells us that there must be some error involved. It is difficult to explain what the exact reasons are for such discrepancies, however there are some likely sources of error. All the apparatus used in deriving the radiative components in Table 1 have a degree of instrumental error that is associated with uncertainties in the calibration characteristics of the instrument (See Sheet in Appendix: Instrument Details and Calibrations Summer 2005). When calculating the values for Rn and G0, the instrumental accuracies were used to estimate the uncertainties of these values and these uncertainties are stated in Table 1. However, it may have been possible that the accuracies stated for each apparatus may in fact be inaccurate. Although, even if this was the case, it would not have a considerable affect since the original accuracy of each apparatus are only several per cent. Therefore it is likely instrumental calibration error has not affected Rn and G0 significantly. Since the actual difference between the values are comparatively small, the error involved is hard to identify, therefore it is likely to be a combination of smaller errors, such as variations in fluxes across the meteorological enclosure, human error and calibration error. In this experiment, the infra-red thermometer (IRT) was not fixed as it was held by someone and therefore when the readings were taken, the position of the IRT was constantly changing and this will have influenced the accuracy of the readings from the IRT. Some regions of the grass of the meteorological enclosure were greener than other parts and this variation would have changed the albedo of the surface and therefore the energy fluxes. The key results from the eddy correlation method are expressed in Table 2. <table/>It is clear to see that the two values estimated for H by each group are not the same and are quite far apart (Group 4's estimate is some 42% lower than Group 3's value), even though theoretically they should be the same. As discussed previously, it is likely the accuracy of the instrument has little influence on the value calculated. However, during the experiment, it was noticed that there was a problem with instrument lag and that this had the effect of sensible heat flux being under-estimated. The calculated values for λE are also dissimilar, even if their uncertainties are considered. The reason for this is because λE is calculated using the surface energy balance equation (Rn - G - H - λE = 0), therefore if H is inaccurate, then so will λE. The key results from the profile method are shown in Table 3. <table/>It can be seen that the values calculated for H by each group are very close to each other, and if their uncertainties are considered, both values do agree with each other. This tells us that the apparatus used were accurate with respect to each other. Although the values of λE are not the same, once again, if their uncertainties are included, both estimates of λE are valid as they agree with one another. The Bowen Ratio values tend to agree too if their uncertainties are taken into account. Values for the sensible heat flux, latent heat flux and Bowen Ratio have been calculated using two different methods (See Table 2 and Table 3); the eddy correlation method and the profile method. Since values attained by Group 4 seem to be underestimated due to instrument lag, the values calculated by Group 3 will be used for comparison. If values of H estimated by the eddy correlation method are compared to the profile method, it can be seen that they are quite different, even if their uncertainties are included. This shows that either serious errors have crept in at some point or one method is more accurate than the other or both. As previously stated, the affect of instrument accuracy is likely to be minimal. Therefore, errors must exist elsewhere. During the duration of the IOP, the cloud cover increased from about 4 oktas to 7 oktas. This change will mean less solar radiation reaching the surface. This will affect the radiation balance and values such as Rn and G0. It may also alter the characteristics of phenomena such as eddies. In turn, this may influence values of H, λE and B0, in particular for the values estimated in the second experiment as this used the eddy correlation method. The eddy correlation method is derived from a measured value of the eddy-covariance between vertical velocity and temperature. Since these parameters are used in an equation in conditions where there is a constant-flux layer near the surface, when fluxes are not constant, the accuracy of the equation deteriorates. As cloud cover did change appreciably throughout the IOP, then so did the radiation balance and therefore the fluxes due to the reduced amount of short-wave radiation reaching the surface. This will have affected the accuracy of H, and therefore λE and B0. In this method, the accuracy of H is also dependant on how frequently values of vertical velocity and temperature are recorded. It may be so that during the IOP, the computer program, GENLOG, did not sample enough. However, this may be limited as the accuracy is then limited by the time response characteristics of the instrument. Another meteorological factor is the change in temperature with height. For the profile method, H was calculated by H≈-ρ(cp/ra)(T2-T1). It is assumed for this equation that near-neutral conditions exist, where the potential temperature doesn't vary rapidly with height. If, however, during the IOP non-neutral conditions existed near the surface, where temperature does vary with height rapidly, then using H≈-ρ(cp/ra)(T2-T1) will be less accurate, depending on how the temperature changes with height. This is difficult to quantify, but the IOP was carried out at mid morning on a summer's day where the sun's intensity was considerably high and cloud cover was not extensive. This would have heated the surface quite significantly and therefore a strong temperature gradient near the surface may likely to have existed. It should also be noted that the eight anemometers on the mast are prone to stalling if the wind velocity drops. This makes the value derived for the friction velocity susceptible to error. <heading>CONCLUSIONS</heading>In deriving values of the sensible heat flux, latent heat flux and Bowen Ratio, it has been found that none of the values estimated are exact and that error is involved with all the parameters and variables. It is difficult to identify what method for calculating H is more accurate. It is obvious that both methods are subject to different errors, some uncontrollable like the weather, others such as sampling error and instrument error. But once H has been calculated, its error is then carried on to λE and finally to B0. The accuracy of the eddy correlation method is influenced by the frequency of sampling, the instrument lag and calibration accuracy of the instrument. The experiments carried out have found that the time response characteristics of the instrument introduce great error and that changes in atmospheric conditions do not help the accuracy of the experiment. The accuracy of the profile method is also subject to errors. This method and its theory have been derived assuming near-neutral conditions. To achieve this, especially on a summer's day is difficult as there is often a strong temperature gradient near the surface. This and other factors such the anemometers stalling all introduce reasonable error. When comparing each method, it can be said that the eddy correlation method is perhaps a better method to obtain values of sensible heat flux, latent heat flux and the Bowen Ratio. This is because the profile method is sensitive to measurement errors in wind velocity and temperature and what the temperature gradient is like near the surface. The eddy correlation is perhaps the more accurate of the methods because its accuracy really only depends on the frequency of sampling, the instrument lag and calibration accuracy of the instrument. The calibration error is considerably small. The instrument lag seemed only to affect one of the experiments, therefore it can be considered a unique event and the sampling frequency which was every second proves to be adequate. The accuracy of the experiments could be improved in several ways. The entire IOP could be repeated at least once and then values attained could be average. This would also have the benefit of excluding results that are not consistent with the rest. The profile method could be carried out when there are near-neutral conditions. This should allow the accuracy of H to be greater. The sampling frequency for the eddy correlation method could be increased to slightly improve the accuracy of H. By improving the accuracy of H, the accuracy of λE and B0 should also increase. 