<heading>Introduction:</heading>The first things that come to mind when we talk about the Viking Age are plunder, siege and violence. However, this period in European history has undoubtedly left a much more significant mark on its cultural development, than merely burned monasteries and plundered villages. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Europe faced an entirely different type of political, economic and social organization. While the south was dominated by the Gothic kingdoms, the north-west Europe was much less centralized and the system of chiefdoms was predominant in the early stage of post-Roman times. The growth of Frankish power and the spread of Christianity began the process of political and social changes, leading to early state formation. Changes in the character of production, the increasing social stratification, the intensification of trade, and the formation of urban-type centers and the early-feudal states were accompanied by the development of shipping of inland, coastal, and sea-going types, emphasizing the differentiation of tasks in the sphere of transport. Therefore, with the development of more advanced shipbuilding technology and the establishment of more centralized rules in Scandinavia, the so called Vikings initiated their sea voyages in search for new lands. Till that time military conflicts or alliances dominated in the relations between the regions of north-west Europe. Their aim of the Viking voyages, however, was not entirely limited to invasion and conquest. They were as skilled tradesmen as warriors, therefore their expansion resulted in the rebirth of what was first the trade settlements around the Baltic and later proper towns or cities such as Dublin or York in Britain. By that time, the seas around the north-west Europe were regularly crossed by Frisian merchants, Anglo-Saxons, Slavs and growing in strength Scandinavians. The Viking voyages have been thoroughly studied for many years. Much ink has been spilt on the Viking warfare and trade. The vast amount of evidence available both in Britain and on the Continent encouraged the studies of shipbuilding. Also the contacts between north-western societies received a lot of attention. However, these two aspects of life in the Viking Age have often been two separate areas of study. This topic has not been much explored yet, but shipwrecks undoubtedly carry a lot of information, not only about the shipbuilding techniques, but also about the contacts between early medieval societies and regions of north-west Europe. The aim of this work is to examine the role played by the ship finds in our understanding of the cultural contacts between societies in north-west Europe under Viking hegemony. Although trade and war were part and parcel of the social relations in the studied period, they will not be the subjects of analysis in this work. Instead, it will concentrate on the evidence for the spread of culture, art, technology and religion. <heading>Early Medieval wreck finds:</heading>Most of the ship finds known also inevitably comes from the Viking Age from that region, resulting in the Viking ships being one of the best documented and studied development of ships. This is largely due to the fact that Scandinavians treat that period as a very important part of their cultural heritage. Therefore, the archaeology of the Viking Age, weather settlements or ships, is highly developed in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. In addition, at least till the 10 th century the Viking dominated the navigations at all seas around north-west Europe. Their early voyages were mostly targeted at war and conquest, therefore the safety at sea was very limited and the danger from the pirates caused decrease in sea traffic. The Vikings did not fight their battles on their ships, but rather preferred to attack on land from sandy landing places, which was the reason why we do not find many remains of ships sunken during sea battles at that time. There are, however, some wreck finds from other regions of north-west Europe, as all in all the Vikings did not manage to seize all the traffic at sea. In the Viking Age the predominant type of ships used in north-west Europe was the clinker-built, round-hulled vessel, both oared and under sail. They further divided into the keel plank boats associated with shallow waters of the rivers, creeks and coastal seas between Denmark and France and the T-shaped keel boats, associated especially with Scandinavia (Greenhill 1995). In order to analyze the significance of shipwrecks for understanding the cultural contacts in Viking-age Europe, it is necessary to present in short some most important finds representing these types in different regions of north-west Europe. It is impossible to present all the finds, however the ones shown below are surely representative for their seamanship traditions. <heading>Scandinavian finds:</heading>Scandinavian shipbuilding, as it was mentioned above, is very well studied and documented, mainly because of the extensive research directed by the Danish National Museum at Roskilde. Numerous ship finds coming or related directly to that region contributed enormously to our understanding of early Medieval shipbuilding technology. The best known examples of these finds include the Skuldelev or Ladby ships from Denmark, but also Norwegian Oseberg, Gokstadt and Tune or Swedish Äskekärr or Galtabäck to name but a few (Delgado 1997). They represent a wide range of types, including warships (Oseberg, Gokstadt and Ladby), cargo ships (Äskekärr) and small fishing units (Skuldelev 6). <heading>British contribution:</heading>Archaeological evidence suggests that by the time of the Viking invasions, the shipbuilding traditions in Britain were also already well-developed. Since we still know relatively little about it, the discovery of Graveney boat contributed largely to the understanding of the craft of shipbuilding. In terms of its function it can be paralleled with Skuldelev cargo ships. Greenhill (1995) suggests that it has been used in early tenth century AD to sail between creeks and rivers of Sothern England and probably to the Low Countries. Another interesting, although not that obvious example is the Skuldelev 2 warship, which has been built in AD 1042 in Dublin and sailed possible as part of a diplomatic voyage to Denmark (Crumlin-Pedersen and Olsen 2002). <heading>Germanic and Slavonic ships:</heading>North part of what is today Germany has been inhabited by both Germanic and Slavonic tribes in the Viking Age. Therefore, these two ethnic groups developed somewhat similar shipbuilding tradition. By the end of the analyzed period, their achievements were only slightly behind those of Scandinavia. Their ships were also clinker-built, predominantly cargo or multi-function vessels. Extensive research has been done at the trading centre of Ralswiek on the island of Rugen, where ships have been excavated dated to the 9 th to 11 th century. Although the lands inhabited by the Western Slavs lay more in central Europe, their inhabitants had also their input in the formation of the Baltic trade zone. The ship finds discovered on the southern shore of the Baltic contain wrecks of cog and clinker-built boats, as well as many artifacts associated with the ships' function, weather it was war or more commonly trade. The dugout and raft would appear to have been the prototype of the Slavonic boat. The second stage covered the evolution of the oar-sail and sail-oar boats fitted with a side-rudder. Those finds include ships such as Orunia I (I, II, III), Mechlinki, Charbrów, Czarnowsko, Szczecin, Frombork or Dzierzgon (Smolarek). <heading>Wrecks as evidence for cultural contacts:</heading><heading>Spread of culture and art:</heading>The large extent of influence of the Viking culture is evident even in such remote places like America or Constantinople. In north-west Europe the traces of their artistic styles are visible in almost every place they visited. Such elements as rune stones or sagas are well-known examples of the spread of Viking culture. However, the shipwrecks on which these people traveled also inevitably contribute to our understanding of the spread of their culture as well as cultures of other societies that interacted with each other at that time in one way or another. Towards the end of Viking Age, the societies in Europe were undergoing a transition to feudal society. Because of its remote location Scandinavia was always slightly behind Europe in terms of social and religious changes such as feudalism, spread of Christianity or European trade. These changes, however, reached Scandinavia at last and the way by which they 'arrived' is visible in shipwreck evidence. Skuldelev 5 represents an interesting example of adoption by the Danish society of a system of relation between the king and local communities. It is thought to have been built as part of the laidang system, where local community had the duty to keep one ship for the king's use. The elements of construction of Skuldelev 5 suggest, that it was built from very cheap local materials and repaired many times to prolong its seaworthiness (Gardiner 1996). Ship finds are often used to support the vast amount of written evidence that we have from the Viking period. Numerous sagas, as well as chronicles reported about the everyday life of contemporary people and their contacts with foreigners. It has been suggested, that the two women buried in Oseberg ship were Queen Åsa and her slave girl, a person known historically from Snorri Sturlusson's saga (Delgado 1997). Also the Bayeux Tapestry is a source of many information about the Viking-age shipbuilding as well as everyday life of Norman people. It presents activities from early stage of construction of a ship, to a full representation, together with their cargo and crew. This brings the debate to the issue of spread of shipbuilding techniques throughout north-west Europe. The remains of the Slavonic boats allowed reconstruction of number of early medieval vessels used by Western Slavs. A good example might be the replica of Ralswiek 2 ship, Bialy Kon, which helped to shed some light upon the technicalities of Slavonic boatbuilding as well as the navigation methods. Although less directly, this contributed to the wide debate about the contacts of Western Slavs with other Baltic regions, since during the trial voyage from Ralswiek to Wolin, the ship proved its sea going capability (Indruszewski 2000). Also the art of the subsequent regions have been largely spread throughout north-west Europe thanks to the use of ships. Most Slavonic ships were discovered in the place where they were discarded for one reason or another, which explains lack of major other finds associated with for instance northern ship burials. However, numerous Slavonic finds in Scandinavia and vice versa proves that these ships once must have carried some vast amounts of objects, contributing this way to the cultural exchange between Scandinavian and Slavic societies (Chudziak 2003). This thesis seems to be proved by the presence of late Slavic pottery on board of Skuldelev 5 ship, found also often in Scania (Crumlin-Pedersen and Olsen 2002). Other finds related to Viking-age boats and harbors include a set of total 106 toys found by divers in the Gdańsk bay in 1948, which were models of boats from the same period. Weather these models imitate Slavonic or other boats, this inevitably contributes to our understanding of medieval shipping and if these toys imitated ships from other regions, also the character of local contacts with different groups. Therefore, it is evident that shipwrecks provided archaeologists with numerous valuable information about the technicalities of the spread of European cultures, which otherwise might have been unavailable from the finds inland. Because of the limited space on a ship, the warriors, merchants or travelers took with them only what was essential for their life. Warriors, who set off for a long journey would take 'a piece of home' with them on board, which is useful evidence for reconstruction of their ethnic identity (Hardt, Lübke and Schorkowitz 2003). Merchants were traveling with the cargo that they hoped to sell on coastal markets. Therefore, the finds from shipwrecks are very important in studying the cultural context of a ship and its crew. Unfortunately, many such finds do not survive well in wet environment. However, the wooden construction elements of ships survive surprisingly well. This brings us to the analysis of the spread of technology in Viking-age north-west Europe. <heading>Technology of shipbuilding : </heading>There are several theories regarding the development of European shipbuilding. Greenhill (1995) suggests, that many European shipbuilding traditions originate from one root, from which they sprang simultaneously in slightly different and independent directions. While the Viking influence on the shipbuilding in the British Isles is quite obvious because of the scale of Viking settlement and presence in Britain, the lands beyond Germany have been comparably little investigated. The site of the ship from Ladby, with its rich archaeological material proving constructions and repairs of local ships, is an evidence for the influence of Slavic shipbuilding techniques within contemporary Danish society (Delgado 1997). Also, the wood analyzes of many Slavic boats have suggested that they carry some marks of repairs conducted on Danish islands. The presence of Irish ship in Denmark (Skuldelev 2), which in addition has been built largely according to Scandinavian tradition, is an interesting indication of the flow of shipbuilding techniques across Europe. McGrail (1993: 98, in Greenhill 1995) claims, that 'during the Viking period and up to the mid-twelfth century.... the evidence is thus overwhelmingly that the Dublin ships and boats were in the mainstream of the Viking tradition, in their sequence of building, in their form and structure, and in their method of propulsion (and probably also steering)... The Dublin wood working techniques are in the mainstream, with little, if any, sign of regional variations'. The Graveney boat also provides the first archaeological evidence for what is called barde in Danish, an angular projection at the junction of the stem and stern posts with the bottom structure of the ship. Crumlin-Peredsen believes that in Scandinavian shipbuilding this feature was introduced with the use of sail, as it improved the stability of the ship (Greenhill 1995). Large number of drawings representing barde appears in many north European contexts like the images on coins from Birka or Hedeby. Although an exchange of technologies between societies which are in frequent contact might seem an obvious thing, archaeological material from shipwrecks themselves can reveal some unknown aspects or regions of such exchange, as the Slavic example has shown. Therefore, we should not regard shipbuilding as a fully exploited area of research, but apply new technologies on known data in order to draw conclusions that could not be reached before. <heading>Religion and burial rites: </heading>Well before and during the Viking period, Christianity was spreading widely across Europe. While the Franks or Anglo-Saxons was already Christians, in the central parts of Europe, as well as in Scandinavia the local pagan belief systems were still predominant. For this reason, it is fair to suspect, that the Vikings having reached and settled in so many locations would have had a frequent contact with Christianity. And indeed, towards the end of the Viking period we have evidence for wide adoption of Christianity within the Scandinavian society, together with more centralized power and political organization. Weather pagan or Christian traditions, they surely must have spread by means of ships, similarly to other cultural aspects such as artistic styles. Significant evidence proving this thesis is the spread of Scandinavian burial rites. Ironically, many of the available ship finds today come from inland contexts, such as burials. The well-known examples include the pre-Viking Sutton Hoo in Britain or Oseberg and Gokstadt ships from Norway. This indicates the secondary use of the ships and may bias slightly their interpretation, since it cannot be entirely certain to what extent are they representative of the contemporary ships used at sea. However, these finds are a valuable source of information about the burial rites in north-west Europe. The tradition of ship burials seems to have originated in Scandinavia, from where it spread to the Germanic and Frankish people, as well as Britain. On the territory of north-western Slavic tribe of Vielets in Menzlin, a number of burials have been discovered, which resemble the Scandinavian fashion of ship burial. Although the graves did not contain ships themselves, the grave cut was shaped into boat-type cuts laid with stones. This is an evidence for either Scandinavian settlement in that region or strong cultural influence (Duczko 2000). It is justified to suggest, therefore, that the ship finds can reveal a lot of information about burial rites and their spread throughout Europe. The settlers that practiced those burial rites must have sailed to the Vielet territory on ships, which they then tried to take with them to the afterlife. This also provides interesting insight into the ideology and the system of beliefs of the contemporary people, weather the natives or the new-comers. <heading>Conclusions:</heading>The studies of Viking-age shipwrecks as evidence for cultural contacts are still relatively little developed in Europe, although vast amount of shipwreck materials have been used for investigation of shipbuilding techniques. Many ship discoveries have been made either in late 19 th or the first half of the 20 th century. The technologies of archaeological investigation were far less advanced than today, therefore many evidence that today would have been studied in detail, have been omitted and inevitably lost. On the other hand, the new opportunities that experimental archaeology has to offer today open new perspectives and approaches to the study of boats. A more social approach has recently been applied in this field, resulting in more advanced examination of the relation between shipbuilding and cultural contacts. In the future experimental archaeology as well as innovative display methods will surely contribute to the understanding of the organization and relation between societies in north-west Europe in the Viking Age. The Viking Ship Museum is an iconic example of the use of new technologies and theoretical approaches to the study of ships. The research conducted there proved that shipwrecks can provide precious evidence for the mechanisms by means of which cultures and art spread in early Medieval Europe. Such phenomena as the transition to feudal society or adoption of Christianity on European scale are certainly better understood if we know how they occurred. Also archaeological materials might prove useful in verifying the often subjective historical evidence. The shipbuilding techniques have been shared by many societies, which contributed to the general development of the region, resulting in the establishment of extensive trade connections. The types of technologies adopted from other societies might as well tell us a lot about their mutual relations. If the Irish adopted the craft of warship building, that might suggest, that the predominant relations that they had with the Scandinavians were military. Undoubtedly, the technological advancement of one society put it in a superior position towards the other, which drove the technological development and competition. The spread of Christianity has been studied in detail, however the pagan traditions that many medieval societies shared were equally important. A more in-depth analysis of the finds accompanying the crew on their voyages might shed some new light on the spread of religious practices. Many European burials contain ships, the tradition which spread from Scandinavia. That might have meant that the Scandinavians were somehow treated as more advanced and adoption of their rites became a sign of higher status within other societies. However, not only the shipwrecks themselves can be useful source of information about the Viking-age cultural contacts between the societies in north-west Europe. Also other finds associated either with boat technology like the toys from Gdańsk or with boat burial rites, like Menzlin cemetery can reveal other aspects of these contacts, not visible otherwise in shipwrecks. Therefore, it is fair to suspect, that with the development with even new techniques of archaeological investigation and surely with new approaches, even the finds that we have today can surprise us with new information. Some require re-interpretation, the others just more in-depth analysis. In the future, the emphasis should definitely be put on the new way of reconstructing and displaying the finds, to move them from the pages of archaeological reports to the museums, where they can come back to life as education tools for the present and future generations of visitors. 