This flask belonged to an army sergeant William Belcher from Abingdon (Berkshire). It was used in the late 19 th century to carry gun powder either for hunting or military purposes. You would think that this is made of horn, but it is in fact an imitation. What does that tell us about the owner? <table/><heading>Analysis:</heading><heading>Levels of information:</heading>The label has been design in a way to provide the reader with different level of information, bearing in mind that there are various kinds of museum visitors, with different expectations and levels of engagement. Thus the first line contains only the basic knowledge about the object, informing that it is a powder flask. This piece of information is for those who only want to know what the object is and move on with their museum visit. The second, informative part of the label is designed to provide the more interested visitor with some more in-depth information about the flask. This is, however, not too detailed, mainly because of the limited availability of the information about this particular object. This would not be a crucial part of an exhibition, therefore a thorough analysis is not so much essential at this stage. The third, interpretive part contains more specialised information, especially of use for people connected with museums or students. I have decided to use both informative and interpretive kinds of label and combine them to create one coherent piece of information. Using only one type would be over simplistic and aimed at one particular group of visitors, whereas combining two types provide a reasonable amount of information for everybody. <heading>Font:</heading>I have used different sizes and styles of font emphasising different levels of information. Thus the basic information about the object is written in bold and using larger font. The main body of text was written using font size 20, because the object is small enough so hat people would look at it from a relatively small distance, therefore font 20 would be enough. In terms of type of font, I chose a fairly simple form, to make the text easier to read, but a different from usual Times New Roman. <heading>Contrast of text:</heading>Adequate contrast should be maintained, especially in dim lightning, meaning that the closer the colours keep to black and white the better. Black type on white background is easier to read than light type on dark background. Moreover it is recommended to line up the text to the left (ranged left), as it is easier to read than type lined up on both the left and right (justified type). Since the label would be placed in Museum of English Rural Life its design should match the style of the already used labels. They are all fairly simple and mostly in black and white, therefore I kept my design in similar form. <heading>Character of the text:</heading>The text itself aims at answering the questions that the viewer might ask looking at an object he/she does not know. The content of the text depends on the kind of museum the object would be displayed in. As the potential place of display for the flask would be the Museum of English Rural Life, the text should emphasise the social context of the object instead of for example focusing on the materials used to produce it, which would be stresses in a museum of science, for instance. The text contains information about the owner of the flask and its possible uses and significance as a social indicator. I tried to keep the text concise and quick to read, using short sentences, avoiding any elaborate vocabulary. The latter of which I find a little ironic, since we are creating an educational piece of work, the purpose of which is educate people and is aimed rather at the educated part of society. However, taking into consideration the number of children that visit the museum it seems to be reasonable to use simple language. The text is also written in a tone appropriate for the artefact. Namely, the language is not too authoritative and not too light either. The information I did not include in the text is the one about the manufacturer, as there is insufficient amount of information to put on an official label. The flask is marked with a trademark of Sykes Patent, which is probably the manufacturer, but we do not have enough data. What I did manage to find was the information about W. Belcher from Abingdon. To find this I used the Kelly's Directory of Berkshire from 1891 where William Belcher was listed under private residents. He was a member of Volunteers, which indicate the military use of the flask, but also does not exclude the use for hunting. I deliberately used the word 'you' to address the visitor personally and create an opportunity for him to engage with the object on a more individual basis. I also ask a question in the last part of my label, in order to make the reader think about the use of this object and its biography. <heading>Catalogue entry design:</heading><table/><heading>Analysis:</heading><heading>Design:</heading>I based the design of this catalogue entry on the other entries from the database of the Museum of English Rural Life. The reason for this is that the object would have been displayed probably in this museum, therefore the entry should match the pre-existing ones. This design gives already at the very beginning a clear division of levels of provided information. It starts with basic data about the object, then going to a physical description and mentioning also the names that are known and connected to the object. It also supplies the more detailed information for those who are more interested in the subject and maybe will want to come to the place where the object is located for academic of other professional purposes. The layout is as clear as possible, so it is easy to read and easy to find the information ones needs without going through the unnecessary bits. Originally the points were presented in a form of a table, but this could be adjusted when necessary. <heading>Font:</heading>I used fairly simple font in order to make the entry easy to read. It does not have to stand out in any way, as the database is mainly for professional use and the aesthetic values do not play such an important role, opposite to the functional role, which predominantly determines the outlook of the entry. I used different styles of font as well in order to emphasise the distinct information and make it easier for the viewer to find what he is looking for. The database is entirely for computer use, therefore we do not need to worry too much about the size of the font, as long as we obviously do not make it extremely small or extremely large. The usual size of 12 will probably do. <heading>The contents:</heading>The contents of the particular parts of the entry were determined by the contents of the other entries on the database. This is again to keep them possibly similar, since this entry would have been placed in the same database where all of them should be similar in terms of the amount of information provided. The first thing visitor should find is obviously what the object of that entry is. Then I have put the names associated with the object, but personally I think they should be placed further down as this information is pretty detailed and rather not meant for a general visitor, but for the one who searches for further information about the object and its history. The physical description should in my opinion appear next, providing the viewer with introductory knowledge of how the object looks like before they open the like with a picture, to which I will come back in due course. The next information that a reader comes across in this entry is the mysterious classmark. I presume this is the negative number that appears in the files (the name of which is equally enigmatic), but the term seems to be too hard to understand for a general audience. The entry also directs to other related objects from similar categories, namely Hunting, Shooting and Containers. This is very useful for someone who undertakes a research of several objects of a type of object and wants to quickly find different ones in related categories. The next part is purely designed for people who intend to physically find the object within the collection, as it provides the information about its exact location of the flask, which museum is it currently displayed or in this case stored in, exact location within that museum, with the number of shelf and the status. The object could have been under conservation, in which case this should be changed to "Unavailable" or "Under conservation". A very useful tool is the link to a new window with a picture of the object, which of course should have been made prior to the publication of the entry. A small image of the flask could have been placed in this entry itself, so that a viewer could simply click on it to enlarge it, but since this is not a common practice in the Museum of English Rural Life I deliberately decided not to do this. 