<heading>1.0 Introduction</heading>The aim of this investigation is to assess the language of a child determined as medically premature in comparison to popular child language data, of children born at term, by the likes of Fletcher (1985). The idea for this investigation emerged whilst researching for a previous assignment into child language, which will be discussed further in the literature review. The majority of research into premature infants has focused on a sample where prematurity is not the only variable and the assessments have followed an assessment battery approach with the aim to gain a representative sample without extensive qualitative analysis. Briscoe et al (1998) used the Bus story (Renfrew, 1991) to assess narrative skills, Luoma et al (1998) used a variety of subsections from the CELF-3 (Semel, Wiig, and Secord, 1995), whilst picture naming tests, such as the Boston Naming Test (Kaplan, Goodglass, & Weintraub, 1983) have also been used to assess the receptive and expressive skills of a child born prematurely (as in Luoma et al, 1998: 47, 54; and Jansson- Verkasalo et al 2004 :1). Popular data and clinical tests used by therapists and clinicians illuminate the development of children's language, as well as possible differences. However the setting in which the tests are carried out may contribute negatively to the final results and therefore a naturalistic setting will be used in the current investigation. This will look to avoid the affect of unfamiliar environmental factors. The tests typically used to assess a child's language in a clinical setting also act as a means to assess individual aspects of language, such as expressive and receptive vocabulary, phonological working memory and ability to comprehend instructions and information. These areas are, of course, critical to look at in order to track a child's progress; however data may not be truthful in representation. The individuals character and how they react to unfamiliar people and situations may affect their response; with the child possibly being anxious to answer questions or ask for any necessary clarification. Due to these reasons an analysis of naturally occurring speech using SALT (Miller and Chapman, 1985) will be used for the purpose of this investigation, with recordings being taken in the child's home environment. SALT stands for Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts, and assesses language via a computer programme. The programme is designed to analyse transcripts which need to be manually coded to identify utterance types. SALT will allow a full representation of the child's every day language to be recorded and analysed with attention being paid to length of utterances, use of bound morphemes and frequently used verbs. Errors that may occur in the child's language, such as errors in the use of irregular verbs and plurals, can also be noted in SALT. These errors can often be classified as incorrect by clinical tests without identifying that the child may have a comprehensive understanding of the regular rules of language and be over-generalising these rules were irregular forms should be. Marking such responses as incorrect could consequently lead to the child being seen to have diminished linguistic ability, which does not necessarily represent their true abilities or correspond to normal development where such errors are common. The study will commence with a review of literature into premature infants language, cognition and social abilities whilst also looking at the demographics and environment that the infants studied were exposed to daily. These factors will be taken into consideration with the subject of the current study with significant findings being commented on in the concluding discussion. The literature review will be followed by the methodology in which the procedure will be reviewed and a description of the subject given. Details of the subject will relate to their gestational age and other factors which the literature suggests may be significant in premature infants- such as medical history and genetic influences. From the methodology and subsequent reasoning the analysis and results of the investigation will be presented. The results will be compared to Fletcher's (1985) data on Sophie. The consequent discussion will then review the previous literature to assess whether the findings from previous studies into premature infants language abilities do, indeed, support the findings of the SALT analysis or whether the analysis will prove to be a relatively typical representation of a child aged 2; 6 speech. <heading>2.0 Literature Review</heading><heading>2.1 Origins of the idea. </heading>Trask (1995: 167) observed that human infants are the only mammals born unable to communicate or move from A to B independently, emphasising that research has suggested that humans should not be born until after eighteen months gestation. This seems to be supported anatomically due to the skull not being totally formed and therefore unable to protect the brains neurons at the time of birth, yet it is thought that a longer gestational period would make giving birth impossible due to the weight and size of the human head and brain. This notion led to the thought that if the brain is thought not to be totally developed at nine months gestational age then what would the implications of premature birth be on both the brain, in the ways that information transmitted; and on the premature child, in infancy and in later life, in relation to language ability? <heading>2.2 What classifies prematurity? </heading>The term "premature" refers to any child born at or below thirty-seven weeks gestational age (Stenzel, 2004); however prematurity has sub-categories depending on gestational age and birth-weight of the child. Anything between thirty-four and twenty-six weeks gestational age is classed as "severe to moderate prematurity" (Stenzel, 2004) due to the possible health implications that can come with being born at this time. Birth weight categories include low birth weight (LBW, <2500g), very low birth weight (VLBW, < 1500g) and extremely low birth weight (ELBW<1000g) (Aylward, 2005: 427). Although medical science has progressed in recent years, resulting in increased premature babies survival rates; this has also led to an increase in central nervous system (CNS) injury and therefore neurological development deficiencies (Aylward, 2005: 428), which Magill- Evans et al (2002: 42) emphasise often go unidentified and therefore have no developmental follow-up, or possible intervention, to assess that the child is developing normally <heading>2.3 Health implications vs. prematurity. </heading>As mentioned previously premature birth can often have health implications. These include respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) and intraventricular haemorrhaging (IVH) (Menyuk, 1995: 3) with premature infants also being at increased risk of infection and conditions such as Cerebral Palsy, hearing and visual impairments (Briscoe et al, 1998: 656) with increased risk directly correlating with low birth weight (Aylward, 2005: 433). These possible health implications, along with findings from the past thirty years of research into this area, have led to the theory that possible deficits in language amongst premature individuals may be due issues affecting an individual's health, such as cerebral palsy and visual and hearing impairments, as mentioned previously. These possible health implications may, in turn, affect social and cognitive skills suggesting that these delays are the cause of medical complications rather than their gestational age directly (Menyuk, 1995:1). This suggestion implies that premature children with no health complications may have no significant language problems, whilst full term children who have been diagnosed with the disorders previously mentioned may experience language deficits. Therefore, it appears important to distinguish whether premature birth or the possible health implications that can, but don't necessarily, come with it is the more significant feature in these language deficits. However, Magill- Evans et al (2002) found many premature children did experience difficulties in learning without any major health problems being prevalent. This suggests that premature children may have a predisposition to academic and social deficits, despite these difficulties often not being noticed and addressed until they are at school age (Magill- Evans et al, 2002: 52); and suggests that gestational age is more important than health complications. Aylward (2005) reports that premature children demonstrate more problems than their full-term peers with neurological functioning, visuo-motor integration, IQ, academic achievement, language abilities, executive function and behavioural issues such as attention- deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Aylward, 2005: 428.) with these so called "high prevalence, low severity dysfunctions" being said to occur in between 50% and 70% of VLBW infants (Aylward, 2005: 428). Problems associated with executive function, commonly described as executive dysfunction, affect a variety of impairments including conceptual reasoning, verbal working memory, spatial awareness and planning abilities and have been found extensively in ELBW samples in comparison to full-term peers (Anderson and Doyle, 2004 :434). However it is vital to obtain a complete medical, genetic and social history when attempting to isolate the cause of a language delay (Dyer, 2003) as Yliherva, Olsen and Maki-Torkko (2001 as in Aylward, 2005: 434) found a family history of speech and language delay in 11% of their premature sample. <heading>2.4 Social influences. </heading>Factors of social interaction that have been suggested to play a significant role in the development of premature children's language primarily focus on dyadic interaction between mother and child, that are thought to lay the foundations for later language learning and turn-taking norms (Barratt et al, 1992: 1194). Barratt, Roach and Leavitt (1992: 1195) assessed interaction between mothers and their four month old children, twenty-four of whom were full term and twenty-four preterm. The preterm participants had a mean gestational age of 34 weeks, mean weight of 2099g and were all relatively healthy, whilst the mean gestational age of the full-term sample was 40 weeks and mean weight was 3493g. The experimenters controlled for possible variables by using an all Caucasian sample from two-parent homes and by matching the participants according to their socio-economic status via the Hollingshead Social Status index (1978 as in Barratt et al, 1992: 1195). The study looked at mothers and infants vocal, affective and attentional responses (Barratt et al, 1992: 1193). Previous research by Bowlby (1969 as in Barratt et al 1992: 1195) suggests that maternal responsiveness to her child's gaze, vocalisations, smiles and cries is critical to a child's development as these all act as attempts to obtain attention from the caregiver. Research has found that infants born at 23-27 weeks exhibit fewer babblings and more frequent stuttering in their language (Luoma et al, 1998) with similar findings being identified in premature infants at 0;3- 0;6. Premature infants have been found to demonstrate more 'fussing' (Crawford 1982, Crnic, Ragozin, Greenberg, Robinson and Basham 1983 as in Barratt et al, 1992: 1194). The maternal response to the infants 'fussing' seemed to depend on whether the infant was born prematurely or full-term. Both pre-term infants and their mothers were found to have heightened vocalisations with premature mothers responding to their child's fussing with a vocalisation more frequently than mothers of full-term infants (Barratt et al, 1992: 1201). This has been suggested to be a compensatory strategy (Barratt et al, 1992: 1202) as mothers of premature infants may be particularly sensitive to their child's need possibly due to a parental awareness that their child may not have been prepared for the "onslaught of stimulus that hits them when they are born", due to their early arrival (Magill- Evans et al, 2005 as found on McMaster, 2006). <heading>2.5 Socio Economic Status and premature birth. </heading>Barratt et al (1992) used pairs matched by Socio Economic Status (SES) in the previous investigation into dyadic interaction. In many studies SES has been assessed in connection with premature birth as well as general studies into child language acquisition. Socio-economic status is reported to be significant to premature infants due to poorer women being said to give birth preterm more frequently than those of higher social classes, due to nutrition and health care received (Menyuk, 1995: 4). However, these issues may not be as prevalent in the United Kingdom due to health care being accessible to all citizens, unlike in America where insurance or payment for health care is necessary. Kilbride et al (2004 as in Aylward, 2005: 433) suggest that a high- economic status counteracts the affect of prematurity on cognitive scores as premature infants classed as coming from a high socio-economic status family scored a mean of twelve points higher than premature infants identified as coming from a low socio-economic status family on cognitive abilities. <heading>2.6 Premature birth and Cognition</heading>Menyuk's 1991 study into cognitive and linguistic development in full-term and premature infants from birth to 3:0 found significant differences between the results of the full-term and premature participants (Menyuk, 1995:163). The study used clinical tests such as the Bayley Scales, a test which broadly assesses motor and mental development (Bayley 1969, as in Menyuk, 1995: 17) and the McCarthy Scales (McCarthy, 1970 as in Menyuk, 1995: 18) which also assesses motor and mental skills but are more suitable for subjects aged 2;0 plus. These tests were used to establish each group's average capability to recognise contrasting phonemes, produce vocabulary, babble and cry. The findings showed that both groups were performing above the norm on all measures; however, the full term participants were achieving production of ten and fifty word an average of a month and a half ahead of the premature participants. The full term participants were not ahead of the premature participants on receptive language tasks though, despite both groups being found to be equally capable of comprehending 10 words (Menyuk, 1995: 175). Of the four participants whose results caused concern in Menyuk's study, one was full-term whilst the other three were premature, however, two of the latter were identified as having either particularly low birth weight or cerebral palsy (Menyuk, 1995: 164). <heading>2.7 Impairments amongst premature and full-term infants. </heading>These findings suggest that premature children can perform within the norms of child language data, whilst highlighting the possibility that severe neurological deficits and low birth weight can alter the results of investigations. The significance of neurological deficits within language tasks has been demonstrated by Luoma et al (1998) in a study that looked at premature and full term infants. It was discovered that after removing nine of the premature children who had severe neurological disabilities from their study; full-term children were seen to demonstrate specific language impairment more frequently than their premature peers. Premature infants did, however, demonstrate deficits in certain areas such as naming skills and had problems understanding relative concepts (Luoma et al, 1998). This suggests that although those with severe neurological impairment who were removed from the investigation belonged to the premature group, the majority of premature infants will not necessarily perform any worse than a full term group. Greenberg, Carmichael-Olsen and Crnic (1992 as in Briscoe 1998: 655) observed that premature infants do score within the normal range on cognitive tests but these scores still appear to be lower than their full-term peers (Field et al 1983 as in Briscoe, 1998: 655). <heading>2.8 Premature infants and neurological development and mapping. </heading>Research into the area has put forward different findings as to whether premature infants are in fact more deficient in their language than their full-term counterparts; however, the neurology of premature infants in comparison to full term infants is often ignored in the composition of these studies. It has been suggested that "normal" premature infants need a year to catch up with their peers (Dyer, 2003) which may explain diminished ability in some areas as aspects of language learning are thought to be fixed by age three (Dyer, 2003). However, Peterson et al (2003 as in Aylward, 2005: 431) reported that "altered semantic language processing" was found in eight-year old premature children when an MRI scan was carried out. It has been suggested that the neural pathways in these premature infants were different to those that would be expected, however the reasons for this are unknown (Aylward, 2005: 431). The investigation did suggest these 'structural' differences to be the reason for poor comprehension abilities. However, if the learning deficiency had been identified earlier and those affected received additional help, language functions may not have been compromised in the long term with those affected developing typically but via different pathways. This is a theory that is emphasised by Jansson- Verkasolo (2004: 179) who believe that identification of deficiencies at an early age and consequent intervention may change academic abilities in those who experience difficulties in language learning, particularly those born prematurely. <heading>2.9 Intervention and schooling</heading>Aylward (2005: 427) states that premature children will generally have more problems with IQ and academic achievement. It is reported that over 50% of VLBW children need special assistance in school, with at least one fifth of these requiring individual learning disability placements. This increases in ELBW children, with 60-70% needing special assistance in school (Aylward, 2005: 428). By middle school premature ELBW children are thought to be three to five times more likely to have reading, writing, spelling or mathematic problems than their peers (Aylward, 2005: 433) with 16-20% repeating at least one grade (Aylward, 2005: 428). Aylward reports that maths and broad reading skills are most severely disrupted, finding that maths was more delayed than reading in a LBW sample (Aylward, 2005: 433). It has been suggested that by adolescence premature children's requirements for special classroom assistance and resources is eight to ten times that of what a full term child would require. This is a significant difference and therefore Aylward's estimation that 32% of VLBW and ELBW children attend mainstream school and are performing a below their peers by as much as one academic year is concerning (Aylward, 2005: 433). <heading>2.10 Foetal brain development in the late stages of gestation. </heading>Neurological development can to some extent explain why premature children often have lower IQ's and more behavioural problems than their peers, as demonstrated previously through Peterson et al's findings (as discussed in 2.7). However few cognitive impairments have been specifically linked to prematurity. The brain increases in volume 2.7 times from 29 weeks gestation to 40 weeks gestation, with grey matter, responsible for IQ and cognition increasing to four times its size and white matter, responsible for attention, increasing to five times its size (Aylward, 2005: 429, 431). By being born prematurely an infant is being deprived of these vital developments, with premature subjects being found to have less grey matter, and in brain structures, for example smaller basal ganglia and corpus callosum mass; than full term controls on an MRI (Aylward, 2005: 430). Being deprived of these developments in the womb is suggested to have serious implications on an individuals functioning, with the absence of grey and white matter affecting parts of the brain responsible for language, comprehension, attention and muscular and general anatomical control (Aylward, 2005: 431). Although the brain does continues to develop after birth, because the infant was born early their neurological development would be behind an infant born at term at the same time. This full term counterpart, who will one day become the premature infants peer, will also continue to develop and therefore the premature infant will always be expected to develop slightly slower. <heading>2.11 Non-verbal suggestions </heading>The notion of a low attention span acts as a non-verbal feature of language. Due to the highly complex nature of language, verbal communication is generally accompanied by non-verbal communication (Swets and Zeitlinger, 1976: 325) in the form of body language. Therefore, it is implied that non-verbal features, also, may be a cause for investigation in premature infants due to their differing neurological patterning. As mentioned previously premature infants can demonstrate behavioural difficulties such as ADHD, however Magill-Evans et al (2002) state that non-verbal learning disabilities are not identified until higher grades, suggesting that 10;0 may even be too young for a parent to recognise that their child suffers from them (:52). <heading>2.12 Limitations of the literature. </heading>In 1991, Aram et al (Menyuk, 1995:4) reviewed previous studies into premature birth and it's affects on language and cognition and found that all fifteen studies reviewed had a different area of focus, different age group and/ or different methods. Magill-Evans et al reports in Cognitive and Language Development of Healthy Preterm Infants at age 10 (2002) that Schothorst and Van Engeland (1996) found LBW premature infants to have vulnerability to social and academic functioning where heavier premature infants had none (Magill- Evans, 2002: 43). As much of the research into this area is relatively new, and because each study has a different focus no real conclusions seem to be universal. Individual difference and details regarding social, genetic and biological variables all contribute to the research that presently exists (Menyuk, 1995: 166) and these factors may, or may not, be significant in determining a premature child's capacity for academia (Taylor et al, 2002, as in Aylward, 2005: 434); with Aylward (2005: 434) emphasising that skills necessary for social development must not be overlooked. The majority of the research suggests that premature birth will result in the subjects' language being vulnerable, however, the majority of the research also focuses on LBW samples, some of whom have or have had medical problems. <heading>2.13 Gaps in the literature</heading>Schothurst and Van Engeland (1996 as in Magill- Evans, 2002: 43) report that heavier, and therefore possibly healthy, premature infants do not experience the same difficulties as their LBW peers. This approach uses premature birth as the only manipulated variable, and therefore the results can go some way to suggesting whether premature birth is significant; however, there is little supporting evidence within the literature for this claim. <heading>3.0 Methodology:</heading><heading>3.1 Case Study</heading>The decision to conduct this investigation as an individual case study was made due to the literature into premature birth seeming to focus on larger samples and using standardised tests as a means of assessment. It was felt that by using a case study the data collected could be looked at in greater detail in terms of relative strengths and weaknesses of the subject. The data was collected via recordings which were then transcribed. Although this method does allow for more detailed analysis than standardised tests, the method can be more time consuming, and therefore larger samples are difficult to study. This limitation means that data collected, although representative of the subject, can not be generalised to the population at large (Wray et al, 1998: 190) and therefore can not form conclusions, although suggestions are possible. <heading>3.2 Observational Method</heading>The investigation aimed to collect representative samples of the child's speech and therefore the case study was conducted through the use of an observational method. The observational method aims to record naturalistic data through the use of the subjects caregiver as an elicitor (Bennet- Kastor, 1988: 27), with the presence of an investigator being a variable thought to compromise the data. Due to the possible influences the investigator may have it has been said that by a caregiver taking on dual roles and acting as the investigator as well as the elicitor, the observations are less naturalistic and more experimental (Bennet-Kastor, 1988: 27). Although the method is thought to be representative of the subjects abilities its limitations must also be taken into account. It is important to take into consideration that the data collected in such investigations is only a sample and therefore may not reflect the subjects full expressive abilities (Bennet-Kastor, 1988: 36) as the contexts, dates and times of data collection are subject to external variables; this largely means that the child's production is left to chance (Bennet-Kastor, 1988: 35). The child was recorded within her natural home environment, without investigator interference, whilst going about a typical day's activity. The data collected was thought to be representative of the child's abilities due to the role of the caregiver as the elicitor. The setting used for the recordings was that of the family home. This was thought to be advantageous as it is a familiar environment and therefore would be expected to act as a controlled variable. The factors taken into consideration all aimed to avoid the observer's paradox, whereby "we want to observe how people talk when they are not being observed" (Labov, 1971: 461, as in Bennet- Kastor, 1988: 70). However, the extent to which observer's paradox was avoided is impossible to say. <heading>3.3 Equipment. </heading>The data was recorded on a small recordable MP3 player. The MP3 player was chosen over a tape or CD recorder due to its size. It was thought that by using a smaller device, and one which may already be familiar to the child, observer's paradox could be avoided more successfully. The device is comparable in size to a small toy car and was placed near the child when recording and was controlled by the parents. The possibility of the child wearing the MP3 player around their neck was considered but was thought to draw unnecessary attention to the task in hand. <heading>3.4 Subject</heading>The subject of the investigation is a girl aged 2;6, who shall be referred to as L throughout the investigation. L was born at 36 weeks gestational age and can therefore fall into the category defined as premature in the literature previously presented. The subject had no health complications at birth relating to her prematurity or otherwise and has had no significant illnesses to date. L weighed 2812g at birth, thus eliminating low birth weight as a variable. The subject lives with her parents and younger brother, aged 1;3, in the south of Birmingham and attends a local nursery, with her younger brother, five days a week. L's father is White British and a student nurse, whilst her mother is Jamaican and works in a care home for the elderly. The family have friends from both ethnic communities whom L is regularly in contact with, however most family contact is through her father's family. <heading>3.5 Procedure</heading>The child's parents were given the recordable MP3 player and asked to record L on various occasions, such as play times, bed times and meal times. The parents were asked to note the dates of the recording and the context in which they occurred, this was requested taking into consideration that data is reliant on sampling period and situational variables (Bloom 1974: 87 as in Bennet- Kastor, 1988: 36). It was emphasised that the data must be as naturalistic as possible, with L interacting as usual with various family members and friends. The parents were asked to record every two or three days for a period of approximately four weeks. Once the data was collected it was then listened to and transcribed. The transcriptions were reviewed and samples of one- hundred utterances analysed. The samples analysed were often part of a larger transcript. It was felt that a warm up period was not necessary for the purposes of this investigation due to the familiarity of the assessment environment and the primary elicitors being care givers. The one-hundred utterances from the transcripts were coded and analysed using Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT), a computer programme devised by Miller and Chapman (1985). The SALT programme was used as it provides a comprehensive analysis of the subject's utterance types through the use of mean length of utterance (MLU), word roots and codes, type-token ratio (TTR) and Brown's stages (Bennet-Kastor, 1988: 91). Only the child's utterances were transcribed and analysed. SALT requires a coding procedure to mark types of utterance (phrasal, clausal, minor, lexical or unintelligible), function of utterances (question, statement or exclamation), bound morphemes and main verbs. The transcripts analysed were all one-hundred utterances in length so that comparisons could be made with Fletcher's data on Sophie (1985). The data on Sophie comprises of TTR, VTTR and MLU scores; number of bound morphemes used and Brown's stages, as well as information on utterance types. Fletcher used 100 utterance and 250 word transcripts to analyse Sophie's language between the ages of 2;4 and 3;11 and this investigation aimed to replicate Fletcher's analysis using samples of 100 utterances and 250 words from L's language samples so that comparisons could be made. As L is 2;6 Fletcher's data of Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0 will have to be considered, however it is important to emphasise that this data will be used only as a point of reference and not strictly as a comparison due to Sophie's language being found to be delayed in some areas. Brown's stages will act as the significant marker throughout the investigation due to the age comparisons that are presented; as the majority of the literature into premature children's language uses standardised tests and therefore chronological age comparisons. Each transcript will be analysed individually, however the averages calculated will act as the main data. All results are taken from the clear and intelligible (C&I) utterance analysis set. <heading>3.6 Hypothesis</heading>Infants who have prematurity as their only significant variable, will not necessarily experience language deficits. Therefore, I hypothesise that the subject of this investigation will be achieving an appropriate Brown's stage (stage 2), as illustrated by SALT. <heading>4.0 Results</heading>L's parents collected twelve samples of L's speech over the four week period provided, at various times of day and within different contexts as summarised in table1. <table/>These recordings ranged from approximately seven minutes to forty minutes. When attempting to transcribe the recordings it became clear that some of the samples were unsuitable due to there being too few utterances to replicate Fletcher's method, as discussed previously; or due to difficulty in deciphering the recordings due to L's range of pitch and interference from background noise within the home environment. Due to these limitations only seven transcripts were used in the investigation, as shown in table 2. <table/>The transcription process proved difficult due to difficulty in interpreting what classifies an utterance. It was felt that each of L's turns should be classed as a new utterance, with pauses also acting as a break in L's turn and therefore being transcribed as separate utterances. Although this proved a difficult thing to identify, consistency within these categorisations is the determining factor. Due to the investigation using Fletcher's data (1985) as a reference point, the analysis of L looked at the same features as had been used in the analysis of Sophie. The main focus of the results will be on MLU, TTR, VTTR, Brown's stages and bound morpheme usage. Types of utterances used in reference to the SALT transcript summaries and utterance codes will also be discussed. The results summary will list L's average scores, along with those of Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0 and will illustrate where L was ahead or behind Sophie at either, or both, of these ages. As L is 2;6 the expectation would be that she was achieving Brown's late stage 1 or early stage 2. <table/><heading>5.0 Presentation of data. </heading>The data presented will follow the format presented in table 1. The results will be supported with evidence from the SALT analysis and L's relative strengths and weaknesses in reference to Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0 will be presented. <heading>5.1Transcript summary</heading>Each of the seven transcripts of 100 utterances was analysed, in order to replicate Fletcher's data. From the individual transcript summaries an average was calculated and it was found that 81% of L's utterances were clear and intelligible (C&I). This percentage is lower than that reported by Fletcher of Sophie at both 2;4 and 3;0. However, had L's language samples been transcribed by one of her caregivers, her language may have been reported as more intelligible as exposure to a child's language could aid comprehension of their utterances. Of the C&I utterances L was using statements most frequently, as with Sophie; as well as demonstrating ability to command and ask questions. L's average number of commands was equal to that of Sophie at 2;4, however the focus of the transcript summary is L's ability to use questions. L was found to use an average of 6 question utterances per 100 utterances, which appears to be relatively few in comparison to Sophie, who, at 2;4 where she was recorded as using 4 questions per 100 utterances and at 3;0 used 25 questions per 100 utterances. SALT analysis requires utterances marked as questions to adopt a wh- question format and therefore the analysis of L follows this procedure; however, evidence of L asking questions was also evident. In order to assess L's question formation the Language Assessment, Remediation and Screening procedure (LARSP, Crystal, Fletcher, and Garman, 1989) was used. LARSP allows a more comprehensive view of where L is in relation to her age and abilities by assessing her language at word, clause or phrase level (Fletcher, 1985: 48) from the fifty-first to one-hundredth utterance. Of the questions used within this range of each transcript L's ability ranged from stage 2 (1;6- 2;0) to stage 4 (2;6 -3;0).  FORMULA  Throughout the transcripts L was found to use stage 3 (2;0-2;6) questions a total of ten times, and stage 4 (2;6-3;0) questions nine times demonstrating that she is using questions suggested to be appropriate for her chronological age. L is relatively accurate in her question formation with only one error appearing throughout the data,  FORMULA  In this example L is substituting what with who, therefore making the question formation incorrect. This particular question structure belongs to stage 4 of LARSP and therefore does not suggest any cause for concern, as chronologically L should only just be embarking on this stage and therefore errors would be expected. <heading>5.2 Mean Length of Utterance (MLU). </heading>Mean Length of Utterance (MLU) is based on a one-hundred utterance sample of clear and intelligible (C&I) utterances (Bloom, 1994: 45). Each transcript was analysed individually and then a mean MLU was calculated (for each transcripts MLU refer to contents page). L's MLU was 2.76. This MLU score appears to be consistent with the scores achieved by Sophie at both 2;4 and 3;0 (see table 3). Although L's MLU appears to be consistent with Sophie's results it is important to remember that Sophie was found to be delayed in certain areas and therefore using her as they only comparison may result in flaws. For this reason Brown's stages are employed. Brown's stage (1973) attempt to categorise certain features of language into stages, relating to the chronological age, at which they commonly appear (Bennet- Kastor, 1988: 85). Brown admitted that divisions were 'arbitrary rather than true stages'; however through MLU scores Brown devised stages that correspond to both age and features acquired. As L is 2;6 she would be expected to achieve Brown's late stage 1 or early stage 2, however L's mean MLU score converts into Brown's stage 3, expected at 3;0 to 3;6. At stage 3 acquisition of irregular past tense, possessive - s and uncontractible copula's are said to emerge; the following are examples from L's utterances: <list>Irregular past tense  say(  FORMULA Possessive - s  FORMULA Uncontractible copula  FORMULA </list>L is demonstrating progression in her language acquisition through the development of stage 3 skills, and the good command of stage 2 features that are presented throughout the transcripts. Errors and omissions are present within the transcripts, however Fletcher emphasises that between the ages of 2;0 and 4;0 imperfect production and comprehension is to be expected as the child only has a 'partial linguistic and knowledge system' (Fletcher, 1985: 3). <heading>5.3 Utterance codes</heading>As mentioned previously a mean of 81% of L's utterances were C&I. Those utterances that were thought to be intelligible were coded, according to SALT conventions, as lexical, minor, phrasal or clausal utterances. Lexical utterances, where the utterance is a single word utterance, appeared 13 times on average in L's transcripts- a score similar to that of Sophie at 2;4. Minor utterances, including greetings and vocatives such as 'Daddy' when seeking attention, occurred 15 times on average- equal to that of Sophie at 3;0. However, the main focus of utterance codes is L's use of clauses and phrases. <heading>5.3.1 Phrases:</heading>L averaged 14 phrasal utterances within a one-hundred utterance transcript, which echo Sophie's use of 14 at 2;4 and 13 at 3;0. However, the types of phrasal utterances used by L are the most significant feature to be analysed. Once again, as with question analysis, LARSP was employed to analyse phrase structure. Of the phrase structures listed within the LARSP chart L appears to be performing most consistently within the stage 2 bracket (1;6-2;0) with very little progression after stage 3 (2;0- 2;6). DN's (determiner + noun) were the most frequent used, appearing thirty times throughout the transcripts. Examples of such phrases are:  FORMULA  These examples illustrate a variety of determiners in use which seems to suggest that L's vocabulary is relatively good. L's use of both definite and indefinite articles at various points throughout the transcripts seem to suggest that her vocabulary is developing at a normal rate due to Brown's stages suggesting that these features do not start to appear until stage 4 (3;4-3;10). <heading>5.3.2 Clauses:</heading>L averaged 39 clausal utterances within a one-hundred utterance transcript, which is marginally less than Sophie at 2;4 where she was found to be using 40. As with phrasal utterances, the types of utterances used are the most significant thing to be analysed and therefore the same procedure as was applied to phrasal utterances was applied to clausal utterances. L's use of clauses were most consistently within the stage 3 bracket (2;0-2;6) with L beginning to use some structures typical of stage 4 (2;6-3;0). Most frequently L used the Subject Verb Object (SVO) structure, which would be expected due to this being the canonical structure in English. Subject Verb Complement (SVC) structures were also relatively common with utterances such as, You're fatty (TRANSCRIPT 6)and You're cheeky (TRANSCRIPT 5) demonstrating these structures. Many of L's utterances that were classified as clauses omitted function words such as auxiliary verbs regularly, with transcript 2 being a particularly good example of this. As L and her father as discussing the ethnicity of family members L often omits the auxiliary is resulting in Subject Complement (SC) clause structure:  FORMULA  Although this is a regular error, it is not a consistent one with L using the appropriate function words at various points throughout transcript 2 and the other transcripts analysed:  FORMULA  <heading>5.3.3 Telegraphic Speech:</heading>Theses omissions of function words are said to create telegraphic speech. Similarly, omission of subject also results in telegraphic speech (Bloom, 1994: 7)and L is also seen to do this on a number of occasions with many of her clauses adopting the Verb Object (VO) or Verb Object Adjunct (VOA). Although the subject is omitted, the intended meaning is often clear with utterances such as: <list>VO  FORMULA VOA  FORMULA VO  FORMULA </list>, being understood due to the context in which the utterance was said and the child's use of directed speech towards her conversational partner. <heading>5.4 Type- token Ration (TTR)</heading>Templin (1957) devised TTR to look at lexical diversity of a subject's vocabulary by assessing 250 word samples of speech. The total number of words within the sample (tokens) and the number of different words within a sample (types) are collected and then the types are divided by the tokens:  FORMULA  L's mean TTR was 0.31, slightly lower than Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0 where she achieved 0.36. Both L's and Sophie's TTR's would be said to be low as Templin suggested that a TTR lower than 0.45 was cause for concern. However, the research which TTR is based on was conducted on children aged 3;0- 8;0 (Fletcher, 1985: 47) and therefore the same expectations may not be anticipated. L uses a lot of repetition throughout the transcripts sometimes repeating the same utterance four or five times, as demonstrated at the end of transcript 1. This repetition will act as a major contributor to L's low TTR score, however due to the investigation being a case study and the data only being a product of a limited time span it may not act as a true representation of L's language due to given contexts and tasks often dictating the vocabulary used. Again this can be demonstrated through the data collected, with transcript 2 seeming to be the clearest example of a topic dictating language choice. The transcript show's L repeating the words black and white throughout, however this is due to her father attempting to teach her about the different ethnicities within their family so by her father asking the question What colour is x? L has little option but to reply either black or white. <heading>5.5 Bound morphemes. </heading>Analysis of bound morphemes uses 250 word samples. The samples were analysed and the results of the analysis set (C&I utterances) will be used. L was found to be using a mean of four bound morphemes per 250 word sample, which is slightly fewer than Sophie at 2;4 where she was found to be using five bound morphemes. However, types of bound morphemes used are more significant than how many bound morphemes are used. Table 3 shows the bound morphemes that Sophie was using at 2;4 and 3;0 but due to L's bound morphemes being calculated as a mean, examples of her bound morphemes were not previously given. Table 4 Shows bound morpheme types and the distribution amongst L's transcripts: <table/>L demonstrates a range of bound morphemes across her transcripts, with a greater bound morpheme diversity than Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0. L's use of different types of bound morphemes is relatively sophisticated for her age, as by 2;6 the expectation is use of - ing and plural - s only. Therefore,despite not being able to compare L's bound morphemes to the data on Sophie; it appears that L is acquiring bound morphemes successfully. <heading>5.6 Verb Type- token Ratio (VTTR)</heading>VTTR looks at lexical diversity of verbs within a child's language. As with TTR a score of below 0.45 is considered a cause for concern, but as mentioned previously these expectations were based on a slightly older sample than L, which may have some effect on the significance of the results. VTTR is assessed using a 250 word sample, and once each transcript was analysed a mean score was calculated. L is achieving a mean VTTR of 0.35 which, as with TTR, is suggested to be cause for concern. As mentioned previously, repetition influences type-token scores massively and this has been a major characteristic of L's speech throughout the transcripts analysed. In transcript 1 L uses the verb love repeatedly, and similarly she uses make repeatedly in transcript 3. However, the most influential factor in this VTTR assessment appears to be L's use of is as a main verb, as it is used a total of twenty-one times in transcript 2 alone. L is, however, found to be using a relatively large range of verbs and seems aware of many implicit syntactic rules which accompany many of these, such as verb valency. Verb valency looks at the number of arguments a single main verb takes with the final clause structure depending on the verb choice. L is demonstrating use of monovalent, divalent and trivalent verbs with the verb taking one, two or three arguments respectively. Monovalent verbs do not take a direct object, with an example within L's utterances being Lie down there, I want to (transcript 6). L's repeated use of  love acts as a divalent verb through it taking two arguments- who is doing the loving and who is being loved  (I - love - you), whilst the trivalent variation is demonstrated through the utterance, Daddy you have to put me to bed. This demonstrates the subject, verb and two arguments in the form of the object and adjunct. Use of such features shows that L has acquired implicit syntactic rules, however due to her age errors would still be expected. <heading>6.0 Discussion. </heading><heading>6.1 Summary of L's relative strengths and weaknesses in reference to Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0. </heading><table/><table/><heading>6.2 Similarities and differences between L and Sophie. </heading><heading>6.2.1 Similarities.</heading>L's TTR is suggested to be cause for concern by Templin's criteria (Fletcher, 1985: 47). Sophie's scores on this measures were also shown to be delayed, again suggesting cause for concern. The average TTR is suggested to be 0.50, with anything below, or indeed above, 0.45 being said to show atypical lexical diversity (Fletcher, 1985: 47) L's score is significantly below this marker, which does indicate concern; however it is important to remember that TTR averages were formulated on an older sample (3;0-8;0) and therefore may not be as representative of a younger child's language (Fletcher, 1985: 47). Bennett- Kastor (1988: 87) stresses that TTR is sensitive to sample size, and therefore suggests that factors such as repetition which effectively decrease the sample size may be partly responsible. However, due to repetition being expected within any language sample, it appears that L's vocabulary may be developing at a slower rate than Sophie's due to the sample sizes assessed for both L and Sophie being equal. This is only a suggestion and would need to be assessed in more detail, and using larger samples, to form any significant conclusions. A similar situation arises when assessing L's VTTR, both in comparison to Sophie's achievements and with Templin's suggestions. Again L is performing significantly below Templin's(1957) suggested 0.45 average, achieving 0.35. Again this is suggested to be a cause for concern and once again the same limitations of Templin's criteria being based on older children are faced. L is found to repeat some verbs regularly within a transcript, as referred to in section 5.6, which again limits the sample size. In comparison to Sophie's achievements, L is developing steadily, bridging the gap between Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0 with her score. The contexts in which the utterances were produced will also be an influential factor with different conversations possibly dictating specific language, relevant to the task being carried out, to the speakers. As table 2 demonstrates, the majority of the contexts were related directly to play or interacting with family members which, although beneficial for the purposes of the observational method, may not have represented L's language abilities fully. Fletcher reports that Sophie uses SVO clause structures most frequently at both 2;4 and 3;0 (Fletcher, 1985: 69, 99). L was also found to use SVO structures most frequently, (refer to LARSP charts within appendix) with the majority of her utterances falling into the stage 3 category. Similarly, this is the category occupied most by Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0, with a gradual progression towards more stage 4 clauses being shown at 3;0. Stage 3 is estimated to be the equivalent of age 2;0-2;6 and therefore it's dominance in L's and Sophie at 2;4's language is to be expected. It is apparent though that as Sophie is showing signs of more stage 4 clauses at 3;0 (2;6-3;0), L is also beginning to do so at 2;6. This may suggest that L's syntactic development is in fact ahead of Sophie's, however as previously emphasised this is only a suggestion and further investigation would be necessary to form any significant conclusions. <heading>6.2.2 Differences</heading>Although Sophie's MLU at 2;4 and 3;0 are within the suggested age appropriate categories of Brown's stages, L is found to be achieving above the expectations for her age. As shown in table 5, Sophie is reaching Brown's stage 2 (2;4-3;0) at 2;4 and stage 3 (3;0-3;6) at 3;0, therefore Sophie is producing language typical of these early stages. On the contrary, L is achieving stage 3 (3;0- 3;6) on average and therefore is seen to be commanding language typical of a child six months above her chronological age. The number of bound morphemes used by L was marginally below the number used by Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0. However, due to L's bound morpheme's being calculated as a mean score the types of bound morphemes used had to be analysed individually and the results have been shown in table 4. L is seen to use two or more types of bound morphemes in the majority of the two-hundred-and-fifty word analysis sets, whilst Sophie at 2;4 is only shown to use possessive /s. This may suggests that L is using a wider variety of bound morpheme types than Sophie at 2;4. This suggestion is impossible to support without further investigation, due to the number of bound morphemes used varying in each of L's transcripts. This demonstrates that the results are largely dependant on the sample that is being analysed.Sophie was also found to have more intelligible language than L at both 2;4 and 3;0, with L's average intelligibility being 81%. Although there is no strict guideline for intelligibility, the expectation would be that L was achieving intelligibility similar to Sophie at 2;4, or slightly above. In reality, L is achieving 6% below Sophie at 2;4. However, it is possible that L's lower intelligibility is not actually a reflection of her abilities but a reflection of the limitations of the investigation and methodology- this will be discussed further in section 7.2. <heading>Hypothesis</heading>The original hypothesis predicted: Infants who have prematurity as their only significant variable, will not necessarily experience language deficits. Therefore, I hypothesise that the subject of this investigation will be achieving an appropriate Brown's stage (stage 2), as illustrated by SALT. This hypothesis was proved to be true, with L achieving Brown's stage 3. L did show delay in some areas, such as TTR and VTTR, however conclusions can not be formed from these delays without further investigation and consideration of the measures criteria. <heading>Does the literature support the findings? </heading>Menyuk states that researchers over the past thirty years have found premature birth to contribute negatively to language development (1995:2). This statement does not support the findings of this investigation, with L's language appearing to be developing at the normal rate, producing the expected two and three word sentences (Wilkinson, 1971: 59), despite her prematurity. This investigation used a child born at 36 weeks gestational age, so that prematurity was the only significant variable. This isolates the findings in the literature somewhat as much of the previous research, as reviewed in chapter 2, has used a LBW sample. This acts as another variable to consider and for this reason the subject of this study was also a healthy weight when born. The issue of birth weight is an important one when investigating child development of any kind, as smaller children, premature or full term, are at "increased risk of biological risk factors" (Menyuk, 1995: 3), especially those born below thirty weeks gestational age (Briscoe et al, 1998: 654). These biological risks include respiratory problems and infections, with premature children also being said to be at risk of hearing and visual impairments and cerebral palsy (Briscoe et al, 1998: 654). Luoma et al (1998) refers to these biological risks as "associated hazards" and says that they are thought to result in those affected being more vulnerable to specific language impairment. It has been reported that premature children often have lower performance on many expressive and receptive language tasks than their full term peers, with this low performance sometimes being indicative of further language problems (Magill- Evans, 2002: 54). Menyuk (1995: 164) reports premature children to be within the average range on expressive language tasks, however despite this not being a cause for concern they were not progressing as quickly as their full term peers. This investigation used the data on Sophie (Fletcher, 1985) as the control, and showed that, the majority of the time, L was demonstrating language equal with that of Sophie. Although L was found to be behind on some features of the assessment, such as TTR, she was also found to be ahead of Sophie on some features, most significantly MLU and the consequent Brown's stages. Aylward (2005: 434) reports that in children born below 32 weeks gestational age, particularly males, experience deficits in MLU, whilst vocabulary is also found to be lower than in full term children (Luoma et al, 1998). Although the previously reported results were based on studies where the subjects were born four weeks gestational age prior to the subject of this study, this result seems to support the original hypothesis. Due to L's MLU appearing to be unaffected by her premature birth it seems that L has avoided the developmental difficulties detailed in the literature. L does appear to be developing as normal, acquiring function words, personal pronouns and bound morphemes as would be expected. Although slightly deficit in some areas, L's results do not appear to be cause for concern. This suggests that premature birth alone is not the cause of different and/ or deficit language development in premature infants; with biological factors associated with LBW seeming to be the contributing factor significant to such delays, as well as possible cognitive effects of premature birth. It is vital to remember that stimulation within a linguistic community leads to language acquisition (Kess, 1976: 53) and in order to do this effectively the learner needs to have "the prerequisite cognitive development" necessary (Swets and Zeitlinger, 1976: 324) for language acquisition. Therefore, this investigation suggests that providing an infant is healthy and does not have a LBW or cognitive difficulties, language development should not be affected providing language stimulation is frequent. <heading>7.0 Conclusion</heading><heading>7.1 Relevance of this investigation.</heading>By identifying a gap in the literature on premature birth and language development, this study aimed to look at the language of a healthy child, aged 2;6, who was born at 36 weeks gestational age. This investigation did not aim to make any firm conclusions due to it being a case study, but rather aimed to go some way to identify whether premature birth alone can have the significant effects that have been proposed in the literature in order to suggest future research. The suggestion that premature birth alone is not the cause of language deficits in premature children could be expanded upon and studied on a larger scale in order to establish whether the data presented in this study is, indeed, representative of the majority of healthy, premature infants. <heading>7.2 Limitations and suggestions for future research.</heading>This investigation did not use a control of the same age. Although the data on Sophie was thought to be satisfactory for the purpose of this case study, in hindsight an age matched control should have been used. Future research should consider using matched pairs of premature and full term infants in relation to SES, age and family history of language delay. L's utterances were often difficult to decipher, resulting in many utterances being marked as unintelligible. This may not necessarily have been the case. Noises within the natural home environment may have contributed to these difficulties, as well as L's use of varying pitch often causing utterances to become distorted. These factors add to the naturalistic environment which the investigation chose to adopt, however it may have been beneficial to use more sophisticated recording equipment which would not influence the subject or cause observer's paradox. Coding system used within SALT is often problematic to use, with Brown (1973 as in Bennett- Kastor, 1988: 78) stating that he was "never confident that he knew what the full coding should be" The use of the Sophie data proved difficult to compare to that of L at times. This was mainly due to L's data being based on a series of mean scores, so features such as TTR, VTTR and bound morphemes which had to be assessed in each individual transcript, could not be compared adequately as examples could not be given. There is no way of telling if the data is representative of L's full language production abilities due to it being a sample, and there is no way of assessing comprehension directly through SALT (Bennett- Kastor, 1988: 36). Comprehension assessments may be a useful tool for future research in order to assess whether receptive language is affected in a healthy, premature sample. The form of a case study does not allow any conclusions to be drawn from the investigation. In order to establish whether the finding presented are true of the majority of healthy, premature infants a larger sample of premature infants is required. 