<heading>Introduction. </heading>The definition offered for the classification of SLI is one which is ruled by categories of exclusion (Botting and Ramsden, 2001: 421). Donaldson states that SLI is a diagnosed when a child presents language difficulties despite this impairment not being associated with any other problems, such as cerebral palsy and hearing difficulties (Donaldson, 1995: 21). A non-verbal IQ of 85 or above is expected of those with SLI in order to establish that the deficits produce by the child are indeed language specific (Leonard, 2000: 10) and that otherwise the child is intellectually 'normal' (Johnston: 1994: 107); however in recent years researchers have felt that the definition of SLI by exclusion is not satisfactory and that non-verbal and behavioural skills are also vulnerable in those categorised as having SLI (Stevenson, 1996: 83). This has led to the suggestion that SLI is not in fact a specific disorder of language but a more general disorder affecting cognition also (Hill, 2001: 167). The literature proposing those with SLI will also have non-verbal deficits will be presented. From the given information a discussion will be generated in an attempt to establish a conclusion as to whether those described as having SLI do indeed demonstrate no non-verbal deficits or whether the disorder involves elements of cognition that have been largely ignored in the earlier research into SLI. <heading>Research into the notion of non-verbal deficits in SLI. </heading>Snyder (1982, as in Leonard, 2000: 17) states that a significant percentage of the population who attain a normal non-verbal, or performance, IQ can be found to demonstrate diminished IQ on language measures by approximately 15 points. Such a statement describes the patterns of deficit proposed for those with SLI and supports the view that SLI does not include deficits of non-verbal functioning; however it has been reported that many children with SLI show weaknesses on tasks that require minimal language ability, hence suggesting a possible cognitive vulnerability (Leonard, 2000: 119) with the suggestion that these differences between verbal and non-verbal ability via IQ scores are not significant enough to classify children as having a specific impairment in language alone confidently (Leonard, 2000: 16). Research into the non-verbal abilities of those with SLI have taken various approaches with some focusing on physical ability (e.g. limb praxis) and others focusing more on a child's ability to use abstract concepts and stretch their imaginations (e.g. symbolic play, mental imagery). A variety of evidence will be discussed in relation to potential correlations with SLI as a general processing disorder. <heading>Symbolic play in SLI. </heading>The concept of symbolic play was explored by Morehead (1972, as in Leonard, 2000: 120) who looked at SLI children's ability to project concepts of 'real play terms' (in this case a doll, cot and blanket) onto items which could be used to represent them by using a shoe box and a piece of paper along with the original doll. The expectation would be that the SLI children would be able to map these concepts onto objects that could represent the initial play items due to SLI's exclusionary criteria; however this was not the case. Morehead found that children with SLI demonstrated very little symbolic play suggesting a limitation in their non-verbal intelligence (Leonard, 2000: 120). Similar findings have been reported by Brown et al (1975, as in Leonard, 2000: 120) who discovered that preschool children with SLI had more difficulty than age matched controls using objects in a pretend manner. The ability to inter-relate items was also found to be problematic in SLI children with Udwin and Yule (1983 as in Leonard, 2000: 121) finding age matched controls to perform better on tasks which aimed to elicit concepts of time and space using a miniature toy set. However, this concept was also adopted by Terrel et al in 1984 (as in Leonard, 2000: 121) but using a control group who were matched, not by age but by expressive vocabulary ability (i.e. MLU). This study found that those with SLI out performed the language matched controls, thus seeming to support the original criteria for SLI. Further investigations followed the notion of age matched versus language matched controls in a symbolic play situation and the research has proven relatively inconclusive on one front. Those children with SLI do demonstrate a diminished performance in comparison to their age matched peers; however the language matched controls have proven to differ greatly with some studies finding SLI children to have poor performance whilst others show equally good or even better performance than the MLU controls. Despite the inconclusive nature of the language matched groups the age matched groups were found to be significant with non-verbal deficits seeming to exist within SLI children on symbolic play tasks and the suggestion that poorer play correlates directly to less developed language (Leonard, 2000: 123). <heading> Mental Imagery in SLI. </heading>Mental imagery tasks were also found to pose a difficulty to those with SLI with similar patterns of results regarding age matched versus language matched controls appearing (Kamhi, 1981; Camarata et al, 1981). Those with SLI were found to have difficulty in predicting the direction of water in a tilted glass with many believing that the water would not remain horizontal but parallel to the bottom of the glass regardless of the direction it was being moved in. On an assessment battery of non-verbal tests, Johnston and Ramsted (1983 as in Leonard, 2000: 123) found mental imagery proved to be the area of most deficit with SLI participants failing to identify shapes they had blindly felt correctly. <heading>2.3 Conservation and Seriation ability in SLI. </heading>Tests on conservation and seriation have also been performed on those with SLI and present mixed results. Whilst Siegel et al (1981 as in Leonard, 2000: 126) report those with SLI perform lower than their age matched peers on both measures, Johnston and Ramsted (1983) only found seriation tasks to be deficit with the SLI children involved performing approximately two years below their chronological age. Kamhi (1981, as in Leonard, 2000: 126), however, comments that the differences found on these measures are not statistically significant implying that the deficits found in conservation and seriation are not as poignant as those discussed previously although some pattern of deficit can be assumed. <heading>2.4 Hypothesis testing and Analogical Reasoning. </heading>Hypothesis testing and analogical reasoning tasks have also been found to be problematic for those with SLI when compared to age matched controls. Hypothesis testing found that when the SLI child was presented with a new and unfamiliar situation they found it difficult to make the appropriate distinctions regarding size, colour and shape requiring more trials and therefore input before correctly identifying features (Leonard, 2000: 126/7). Similarly, analogical reasoning tasks were often found to require more processing time for SLI children to reach the correct answers despite the need for them to use language and concepts that would be assumed to be known to them. For example, the participants' in Nippold et al's (1988) study were given sentences such as "Ear goes with radio, as eyes go with ...." (Leonard, 2000: 127), with television. being the target response. Nippold et al and also Kamhi (1990) have reported that in such tests SLI children perform better when there is little or no language demands, i.e. the task demands are set out or supported using images and/ or toys, however it is unclear whether deficits in processing speed are the cause of better performance when linguistic input is limited, or whether the linguistic input of the child is the determining factor as to why these children struggle (Leonard, 2000: 128). <heading>2.5 Auditory Processing in SLI. </heading>Other evidence supporting the notion of a possible processing deficit comes from the research into auditory processing in children with SLI. Those involved had no previous hearing impairment, hence their classification as SLI. Rosenthal (1972, as in Leonard, 2000: 133) found SLI children capable of correctly identify single phonemes produced at intervals of 200ms, however reporting the order in which different phonemes were sequenced proved problematic. The participants' ability to recognise the phonemes independently indicates that the difficulty is not one of auditory discrimination but rather appears to be a processing deficit. However, this approach has been criticised due to its use of verbal stimuli with Rees (1973, as in Leonard, 2000: 134) asserting "what positive results have been reported could well be interpreted to reveal what is already known- that these children have a language disorder". Non-verbal stimuli have therefore also been studied with evidence that children with SLI show poorer performance on tactile perception tasks (Tallel et al, 1985) with more complex sounds and rhythms requiring significantly more time in order for the child to decipher what the sound was or where it was coming from in the case of dichotic listening tasks (Haggerty and Stamm, 1978, as in Leonard, 2000: 136). Tallal and Piercy (1974) suggest that correct identification of vowels more frequently than [ba] and [da] is due to vowel formants being steady throughout their articulation whilst consonant groupings were only steady for just under one fifth of the total duration (Leonard, 2000: 137). <heading>2.6 Motor Ability in those with SLI. </heading>Motor ability is also suggested to be a potential non-verbal deficit associated with SLI. Nicolson and Fawcett (1994, as in Hill, 2001: 150) report difficulties in motor control of developmental dyslexics with an apparent overlap occurring between motor ability and language skills across SLI. Hill (2001) provides two possible accounts for these overlaps, one being that elements of language, attention and motor deficits exist in everyone with developmental disorders with specific disorders being suggested to be rare in comparison; or that the co-occurrence of such deficits is superficial and largely insignificant (Hill, 2001: 150). However, both of these views seem relatively extreme and a middle ground is suggested to be necessary. Children classified as having SLI were assessed for their motor abilities after being differentiated from those with Developmental Coordination Disorder (DCD) - children with DCD have higher verbal IQ than non-verbal IQ, unlike those with SLI (Hill, 2001: 152). Although children with SLI have been found to have movement difficulties, these movement difficulties were not found to limit all motor abilities with Johnston et al (1981) and Preis et al (1997) reporting that fine motor tasks in SLI children tend to be unimpaired. Different tests of motor ability seem to affect different subgroups of children with SLI, for example, children with inconsistent phonological errors and verbal dyspraxia performed worse on peg moving and motor accuracy tasks than those who had been found to make consistent phonological errors and those with phonological delay (Hill, 2001: 158). <heading>Limb Praxis in SLI</heading>When testing for limb praxis children are generally being tested on familiar and unfamiliar gestures which sometimes require the use of a prop (transitive gestures) (Hill, 2001: 159). The children who gestures were trying to be elicited from were cued verbally or through the prior knowledge that they must imitate or pantomime another's actions. It was that children with SLI would naturally compensate for their language deficits by using gesture, as with deaf children. However, Bartok, Rutter and Cox (1975) have found this not to be the case reporting that over 40% of their sample with receptive language deficits did not use gesture (Bishop, 2000: 103). Dewey and Wall (1997) identified limb praxis deficits in familiar situations which did not require a prop, which contradicts Aram and Horwitz's (1983) research which showed the majority of their subjects demonstrated some level of impairment on all familiar gesture tasks (Hill, 2001: 159). The errors experienced by those with SLI are said to be similar to those one would expect to find in a normally developing child, however the frequency of the errors is much greater in those with SLI. This could be due to SLI children typically requiring more time to process information as discussed previously in 2.4 with Archer and Witelson (1988, as in Hill, 2001: 161) supporting this by stating that SLI children are significantly slower in their accurate production of gesture. <heading>3. Discussion. </heading>From the evidence presented on non-verbal deficits in SLI it seems clear that the deficits children with SLI face are not exclusively related to language (Hill, 2001: 162), therefore causing speculation as to what the deficit does indeed entail. Although non-verbal IQ appears to be in tact on initial examination Conti- Ramsden and Gunn (1986 as in McTear and Conti-Ramsden: 1994: 65) suggest that tests used to assess cognition are too 'global' to identify any specific deficits within a persons cognitive system. All the measures discussed previously demonstrate some level of non-verbal deficit in those with SLI with some of these being found to be more pronounced than others; for example symbolic plays clear deficits in those with SLI in comparison to conservation and seriation where deficits are thought to be less significant statistically. However, all of these deficits point towards SLI as a more general deficit in processing ability with Tallal et al (1993) and Kail (1994) seeming to support this notion with their theories on processing deficits in SLI (as in Hill, 2001: 162). Tallal's suggestion that integration deficits are a significant contributor to those diagnosed with SLI supports the evidence presented previously by Udwin and Yule (1983 as in Leonard, 2000: 121) in 2.1. Whilst Kail (1994) suggests that all verbal and non-verbal processes slow and therefore create the patterns of deficit that can be attached to SLI (as in Hill, 2001: 163), which would support the notion that children diagnosed as having SLI require more processing time and therefore are found to have deficits in auditory perception, hypothesis testing and analogical reasoning tasks. Some areas discussed have noted that the research is not totally conclusive as of yet, such as the findings on mental imagery tasks that identify SLI children as poorer than their age matched controls but better than their language matched controls. However, even subtle and inconclusive evidence must be considered as it all leads to a clearer pattern of deficit with these small discrepancies being found so frequently in those diagnosed with SLI that they cannot be ignored (Leonard: 2000: 237). The suggestion that SLI includes these non-verbal deficits add strength to the suggestion that cognitive ability and language are more closely related than previously thought, with Leonard emphasising that through the study of those with SLI non-verbal deficits have been identified and through these deficits being investigated the cause of language impairments experienced by those with SLI may be feasible (Leonard, 2000: 119). However, whether non-verbal deficits are the likely cause or effect of language impairment is unclear with the suggestion that low non-verbal IQ may in fact be found in response to poor comprehension of syntactic structures (Leonard, 2000: 128). Whilst non-verbal deficits have been suggested to be secondary to language impairments, (Leonard: 2000: 237, Stevenson, 1996: 83), low general IQ has been reported by Silva et al (1983, as in Donaldson, 1995: 21) in 25% of children aged 7;0 with SLI. Therefore, although the exact relationship between non-verbal and verbal functioning capacity are still unknown it is increasingly apparent that non-verbal deficits do exist in SLI, with these deficits requiring greater investigation in order to establish whether SLI is predominantly a language disorder or a more general disorder of processing capacity. 