<heading>Introduction. </heading>The term 'levels of language' refers to semantic, phonological, lexical and pragmatic development across language acquisition and use. Typical child language acquisition maps stages at which each of these 'levels' develop and become gradually more sophisticated, however, in atypical language development these 'levels' often appear impaired. Kaiser et al (2001:145) state that children with developmental disabilities exhibit cognitive, perceptual and social characteristics that result in modest to severe disruptions of the normal language learning process. These disruptions are mainly manifested through language delays which, although detrimental, offer an insight into language development of atypical individuals in a more detailed way due to each stage developing at a slower rate (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 311). This assignment aims to look at deficits in spoken language associated with Autism and Down's syndrome. Each of the disorders will be presented separately, with a brief description of what they are before the relative strengths and weaknesses of language acquisition and use is discussed and a conclusion formed. <heading>Autism</heading>Baird et al (2003: 488) describe Autism as a "behaviourally defined disorder characterised by qualitative impairments in social communication, social interaction and social imagination". The disorder is, generally, diagnosed on behavioural deficits as a biological cause has not been identified as of yet (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 328) with the majority of diagnosis taking place after the age of 3;0 (Baird et al, 2003: 490). Due to the relatively late diagnosis there is little evidence from the pre-linguistic period or early vocal development (Tager- Flusberg, 1999: 328), however social deficits have been noted as early as 18months with Baron-Cohen et al (1996, as in Kaiser et al, 2001: 145) reporting that eye contact was only used for requests or regulation. <heading>2.1 Communication and Pragmatics</heading>Children diagnosed with Autism are found to lack joint attention skills (Wetherby, 1986 as in Kaiser,2001: 145), whereby the child seems somewhat reclusive in their own interests demonstrating more interest for their environment than for the people they are sharing it with. This is supported by Ornitz et al (1977 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 329) who reported that autistic infants show no interest in interacting with other babies. These deficits seem to consequently lead to autistic children lacking social language but acquiring and using environmental language (Wetherby, 1986 as in Tager- Flusberg, 1999: 330). Whilst much research into child language development has suggested that pre-linguistic infants favour familiar voices of their own caregivers, autistic children show no preference for their mother's voice over a stranger's, again supporting the notion that autistic children are disinterested in people (Klin, 191 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 329). However, it has been suggested that Autistic children are more limited in their functional communication abilities than normal children, or other congenital disorder subgroups (Prizant and Duchan, 1981 and Shapiro, 1977 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 329). This has led to the suggestion by Ricks and Wing, 1976 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 329) that perhaps autistic children communicate their needs differently to the majority of children. The possibility that autistic children communicate in a different way to most children, whether they are typically developing or suffer from another congenital disorder; seems to be supported by evidence of autistic children in conversation and also their spontaneous speech. Autistic children showed evidence of requesting objects and protesting against situations but were not found to comment on situations, request information, acknowledge listeners or boast and show off (Wetherby and Prutting, 1984, as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 330). Similarly, in conversation with others autistic children introduced irrelevant topics to the conversations with their mothers, often repeating themselves but not elaborating on subjects (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 330). The apparent inability to elaborate on conversation and the need to change topics seems to emphasise the fact that autistic children do not identify with or acknowledge their conversational partners or the listeners. <heading>2.2 Phonology</heading>Both verbal and non-verbal aspects of language are impaired in Autism, however phonological deficits are relatively few and appear to follow similar patterns to those of a normally developing child (Bartolucci and Pierce, 1977 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 328) with similar errors appearing and some functional language appearing by middle childhood. The main phonological deficits that those with Autism tend to exhibit is unusual use of intonation and voice quality with many children, and adults alike, with Autism have difficulty varying their intonation (Pronovost et al, 1966 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 328). <heading>2.3 Lexical development</heading>Tager- Flusberg (1999: 332) reports that autistic children experience similar success rates as a normally developing control group on conceptualisation and organisation of words and phrases at a basic and more sophisticated, superordinate level. This is though to suggest that lexis develops systematically in those with Autism as it is thought to in the typically developing population. However, there is evidence that autistic children do suffer certain lexical deficits through their lexis often seeming immature due to their use of neologisms and errors in the production of words and phrases seeming to mirror that of younger children. In a typically developing child these deficits would not be as consistent as they appear to be in those with Autism (Tager- Flusberg, 1999: 333) <heading>2.4 Morphological and syntactic development</heading>The morphological and syntactic development of autistic individuals seems to be an area where much more research is needed due to the massive variation that is reported within the literature and research. Tager-Flusberg (1999: 334) states that syntax of autistic children has been found to range from no functional language at all to "high normal range language". It has been reported that those with Autism demonstrate a lower mean length of utterance (MLU) than typically developing children, with development happening over a longer period of time but in the same pattern acquiring simple structures first before building on them to create relatively complex grammar (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 333). <heading>Downs Syndrome</heading>Downs Syndrome is the most common neurodevelopmental disorder (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 312) which is typically diagnosed at birth (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 313). The disorder has been found to be due to an individual developing an extra chromosome before birth (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 312) with the disorder varying greatly from relatively few deficits and a near normal IQ to severe impairments (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 313). Abbeduto and Hesketh (1997: 327) suggest that those with Downs Syndrome "see language as a vehicle for performing the same interpersonal functions as do typically developing children, albeit at a considerably later age" with Downs Syndrome children focusing on interpersonal relationships more than their environment. <heading>3.1 Communication and Pragmatics.</heading>Pragmatics appears to be a relative strength in those with Downs Syndrome (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 316). Infants with Downs Syndrome tend to avoid mutual eye contact and vocalisations initially (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 315), however, by the end of their first year these infants have begun to catch up with typically developing infants demonstrating use of more vocalisations than other infants and fixating on peoples eyes (Berger and Cunningham, 1981 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 315). Unlike Autistic children, the centre of infants with Downs Syndromes attention is social interaction, with the suggestion that fewer object request statements parallels the pre-linguistic period where language is used as a means to engage people socially rather than to engage with the surrounding environment (Tager-Flusberg, 1999:316). Children with Downs Syndrome have also been found to be able to maintain topics of conversation for a longer period of time than those developing typically. Coggins and Stoel-Gammon, (1982 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 317) report that when a breakdown in communication occurs, a person with Downs Syndrome will not just repeat their utterance, but rephrase it from an early age, however these breakdowns may be related to limited syntax and intelligibility (which will be discussed further 3.2 and 3.4) which could ultimately cause difficulty in interpreting the intentions of speech acts (Tager-Flusberg, 1999:317). <heading>3.2 Phonology</heading>Unlike Autism, Downs Syndrome is diagnosed at birth and therefore there is evidence as to the early implications that the disorder has on language development. The first indication of language delay in an infant with Downs Syndrome is their delayed onset of canonical babbling. Oller (1986 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 313) reported that infants who had been diagnosed with Downs Syndrome began babbling approximately two months after the control group of typically developing children. This delay was not found to be related to any other factor or impairment, such as hearing loss, which are often associated with Downs Syndrome (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 313), and can affect language. However Dodd (1972, as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 302) found no significant difference between typically developing infants and those with Downs Syndromes acquisition of babbling at the pre-linguistic stage, despite evidence of delayed cognitive skills. Lynch et al (1990) suggested that delays amongst those with Downs Syndrome in the general population may be related to motor delays which were suggested to be more vulnerable in Downs Syndrome children and adults. Smith (1977, 1984 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 303) presented evidence that meaningful speech is delayed by approximately 7 months in those with Downs Syndrome. Similarly, Stray-Gunderson (1986 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 303) found first word acquisition across a wide range of ages within a Downs Syndrome population, varying from a typical 9 months to a severely delayed seven years. This demonstrates the massive variability within the disorder which was referred to initially in 3. Delayed language development in Downs Syndrome does follow the same phonological pattern as typically developing children follow, however development occurs more slowly (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 303) with Downs Syndrome children using a greater variety of substitutions, than typically developing children, before they settle of the correct phoneme (Stoel-Gammon 1981, as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 304) Abbeduto and Hangerman (1997) emphasise the fact that those with Downs Syndrome often have anatomical abnormalities due to the disorder which can affect speech (: 314) as the vocal tract can develop abnormally (Abbeduto and Murphy, 2004 as in Rice et al, 2005: 21). Possible anatomical abnormalities are thought to offer reasoning as to why many with Downs Syndrome are unintelligible as the atypical formation of the vocal tract could limit a person's capacity for communication (Stoel-Gammon, 1997: 301). However, Crossley and Dowling (1989, as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 314) suggest unintelligibility may be due to syntactic delays relating to MLU. <heading>3.3 Lexical development</heading>Abbeduto and Hagerman (1997: 315) state that there is little known about lexical development in Downs Syndrome with those with the disorder being found to perform below their chronological age on both receptive and expressive vocabulary (Madison et al, 1986 as in Abbeduto and Hangerman, 1997: 315) but no research being presented for a possible correlation between cognitively matched pairs.Cardosa-Martins et al (1985 as in Chapman, 1997: 308) however, identifies that when Downs Syndrome children are matched according to mental age they develop their early words at a similar rate. Vocabulary does seem to be acquired at a relatively basic level with comprehension of subordinate and superordinates being poor (Mervis et al, 1985, Tager-Flusberg, 1985 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 318) and more sophisticated vocabulary not seeming to develop, even in adolescence. <heading>3.4 Morphological and Syntactic development</heading>Those with Downs Syndrome experience difficulty with comprehension, particularly of complex sentences (Chapman et al 1991 as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 318). Shorter, more basic sentence types are generally used with more sophisticated forms often failing to be acquired (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 319). Development does continue into adolescence allowing some to progress slightly (Chapman et al 1992, as in Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 319), however most with the disorder will not achieve beyond early grammatical development as most Downs Syndrome children do not start combining words until they are 5;0 or 6;0. <heading>Conclusion- similarities and differences. </heading>Whilst both disorders did demonstrate deficits in language acquisition and use across the different levels of language the deficits experienced in both differed dramatically. Impairments in the language development of Autistic children have been identified with an unusual use of language and poor non-verbal and comprehension abilities being reported (Baird et al, 2003: 490). Lower verbal, than non-verbal scores have been found in preschool children with Autism (Tager-Flusberg and Lord, 2002 as in Rice et al, 2005: 15), with Allen and Rapin (1980 as in Rice et al, 2005: 16) reporting that 67% of autistic children have expressive and receptive language delay. It is thought that language and concepts that engage what are referred to as "theories of mind" are impaired, whilst lexical semantics remain less impaired (Tager-Flusberg, 1999: 334) within autistic individuals, with Tager-Flusberg (1999: 328) seeming to suggest that language deficits lead to the social deficits autistic people experience. The association between Autism and lack of interpersonal communication seems to provide reasoning for the emergence of linguistic terms that refer to and request objects and actions in the environment. It also supports the additions of irrelevant information and common initiation of subject change (Tager-Flusberg, 1999:330) as the child appears to have a relatively egocentric cognitive and linguistic capacity. Phonologically, few deficits appear in Autism with the phonological system appearing to develop typically. Similarly lexis is relatively strong with little evidence being proposed of any significant delays, and neologisms seeming to be the main cause for concern. Syntactically there is little evidence; however there does appear to be a large range of ability across the Autistic populations studied. On the contrary, those with Downs Syndrome experience poor phonology, lexis and syntactic development; whilst pragmatics appears to be a relative strength. Phonologically delays are rife, possibly due to anatomical deficits such as abnormally formed vocal tract or hearing loss. However, there is evidence of a significant delay which is not remedied over time despite a typical developmental pattern occurring. Lexically and syntactically language is acquired at a very basic level with progression being slow. The syntactic delay is most probably a result of the lexical deficits experienced with multiple word utterances appearing late. Pragmatically those with Downs Syndrome are relatively strong, although their other deficits can often cause confusion with identifying the intent of a speech act. Eye contact and maintaining conversation is done well, however initiating conversations is rare. Therefore, when language develops atypically patterns of deficit differ across different congental disorder. Autism is mainly found to be deficit in pragmatics and social features of language acquisition, whilst pragmatics is a relative strength in Downs Syndrome. However, those with Downs Syndrome experience greater difficulties with lexis, syntax and particularly phonology. Despite these dffernces those with Autism and Downs Syndrome have been found to acquire language via a normal pattern, although at a slower pace. 