Forensic science refers to any science that is used in a court of law. There are many analytical methods used to process evidence, and one should consider the advantages and drawbacks of each method to determine its suitability for the evidence in question. X-ray powder diffraction is a commonly used analytical method for the identification of evidence being frequently used in patents, criminal cases and other areas of law enforcement. X-ray powder diffraction is a technique, which provides a high degree of accuracy in the measurement of interplanar spacings. X-rays were discovered by 1895, being electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength of around 1Å, comparable to the size of an atom they were utilised to probe crystalline structures at the atomic level. Materials to be analysed by X-ray powder diffraction should be crystalline or at least partially. The method works with a focused X-ray beam probing the substance/evidence and this interacting with the regular repeating planes of atoms that form the crystalline lattice. The X-ray beam may be absorbed, refracted and scattered or diffracted. Around 1% of all X-rays are scattered or diffracted whereas around 99% will pass straight through the sample. X-rays are diffracted by each mineral uniquely, diffraction depends upon which atoms form the crystalline lattice and their arrangement. To begin this method X-rays must be generated, this is accomplished by applying a current that heats a filament within a sealed tube under a vacuum. The higher the current, the greater the number of electrons emitted from the filament. A high voltage is applied to the tube, which accelerates the electrons emitted onto a target. When electrons hit this target X-rays are produced, they are then collimated and directed onto the powdered sample. A detector is set up to record the signal X-ray output from the sample and this is processed into a count rate. An X-ray scan of the sample is produced by altering the angle between the X-ray source, sample and detector. When an X-ray is diffracted one can apply Braggs law ( nλ = 2d sinθ) to determine the spacings (d) between atom planes. One will know the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation used, λ, and the angle of incident radiation, θ; n is simply and integer and by use of this information, the spacings between atoms, d, may be worked. Each mineral will give a characteristic set of d-spacings providing a fingerprint reference to the compound. This is therefore the information utilised in compound identification, in fact there is an accumulation of data for over 550,000 reference materials represented by the "international centre for diffraction data". This analytical technique is used most commonly for "contact trace analysis", this focuses on Locards exchange principle, "with contact between two items there will be an exchange". This principle is applied to all crime scenes and investigators work along the concept that any persons at the scene would have both taken something from the scene with them and left something of themselves at the scene. Contact traces include substances such as paint flakes, glass fragments, hair fibres, metals, soils, and building materials. Recovery of trace materials can be achieved in an infinite number of ways and it is not unusual for a Forensic scientist to improvise methods. For example cello-tape was not used until the early 1970s to recover debris from garments. Evidence may be collected by shaking; therefore removing loose particulate material from garments onto a sheet. Also combing/brushing surfaces such as shoes or pocket linings where shaking has not been effective. Taping is a method used mainly to recover hairs or fibres from clothing, in addition to this vacuuming has also been used mainly to recover firearm residues from the surface of clothing. Swabbing is also used to trace firearm residues, however most commonly used for smeared material evidence such as blood. In addition material can be picked by tweezers and all evidence is stored in the relevant sealed uncontaminated containers or bagging. There are 7 main areas of evidence types that may be analysed by X-ray powder diffraction. To begin there is soil analysis, this can be used to link persons or objects to a specific area. Secondly there is the analysis of explosives and post blast residues, also pigments and paint analysis again for linking persons or objects to a scene. Goods identification is another branch, helping to detect counterfeiting and the origin of products. On a truly investigative level there is the identification of unknown substances such as poisons and contaminants, this area is used for industrial accidents and leakages, and incidents becoming more common in this day and era such as white powder scares. Another area of analysis is that of degraded bones, used in degraded skeletal recovery for confirmation of composition. Finally there is the area of drug analysis, incorporating investigations into quantitative analysis, and identification of any adulterant helping to ID the supplier. The identification of any compound under these areas can lead to or help conviction or exoneration. Evidence such as combings can be compared to a sample taken from the scene, this can prove a person was present at the scene of a crime, or in the case of unknowns the X-ray diffraction data can be compared to a database of reference compounds. When analysing a substance which may be formed of many compounds, each will produce its own unique diffraction pattern, the substance will therefore produce a diffraction pattern that is the sum of all components. Such a use for X-ray diffraction shown in a case study; is the analysis of drugs and other substances in an unknown. These are dealt with by the Drugs section of the Forensic Science Service, during this particular case study an off white powder was submitted for analysis with a preliminary analysis of Heroin, glucose and sodium chloride content. A sample was subjected to XRD to determine the form of heroin and confirmation of the substances present. Results confirmed the presence of Heroin and sodium chloride but not glucose. A strong XRD was recorded but was unidentifiable, the d-spacings and relative intensities were kept on record. A subsequent case showed the pattern occurring together with that of glucose monohydrate. It was thought that glucose may be forming a complex with Sodium chloride. A complex was synthesised and an X-ray powder diffraction pattern run; this was found to match the unidentifiable substance. This shows the analytical value of a technique such as X-ray powder diffraction, and its routine use in substance identification of areas such as drug seizure. Another example of the use of X-ray powder diffraction is shown in the case of a dockyard burglary committed by an employee. The employee decided to steal a 4-blade, brass tugboat propeller from a neighbouring repair shop. To carry out his steal, is was necessary to cut the propeller into four parts; however during his crime the gasoline fuelled cutter he was using ran out of fuel. The man was seen fleeing from the scene and his license plate recorded. Police later traced the mans dwelling and found him at home minus his overalls, from the neck upwards the suspect was covered in fine brass shavings. Samples of the brass shavings were taken and compared to controls from the scene of crime, these were analysed using X-ray powder diffraction. Although brass was evidenced in both samples the phases were not matched, however due to the heat of the cutter used this had manipulated the brass. A comparison of control sample heated in a similar way to the suspect brass shavings were found to match and the man was convicted of this crime. As with any technique X-ray powder diffraction has its advantages and drawbacks. One advantage of the technique is that it doesn't require the growing and mounting of a single crystal; powders are utilized and this saves time and widens the scope of evidence this technique can be used in conjunction with. This allows the sampling of larger objects, in comparison to single crystal work, with this technique a larger object can be ground up and the sample taken. Also, X-ray powder diffraction can be used in situ, modern day demands have arisen as to identify more at the scene of the crime, aiding a faster legal process. Miniaturisation of the equipment is in working and therefore can be used more easily at the crime scene. Portable databases of the reference compounds are also easily at hand. A major advantage to X-ray powder diffraction is that it is a non-destructive method; therefore the evidence can be preserved. This is useful during legal proceedings as Counsel may call for the specimen to be re-analysed by their own scientists. X-ray powder diffraction also saves time as there is no extensive sample preparation and therefore one can quickly analyse any unknowns. The method can be used to identify compounds as well as specific elements; X-ray powder diffraction will identify many materials including both organic and inorganic materials. In addition the technique can identify polymorphs; different crystalline forms of the same substance, and can distinguish between hydrated forms of the same element, this heightens the methods effectiveness at compound identification. X-ray Powder diffraction can be used to measure a compound or element quantitatively and qualitatively, therefore is a very useful technique with a wide range of applications. As with any method, X-ray Powder diffraction holds its disadvantages also; the technique turns information of 3 dimensions into a collapsed form of a 1 dimensional diffractogram. Therefore some information is disregarded in the final analysis data. In addition the material must be crystalline or at least partially and this means some materials, those which are for instance amorphous cannot be analysed by X-ray powder diffraction. The method is also fairly insensitive, and therefore not a method of trace analysis, for instance a compound present in a mixture of around 1-5% may go undetected by X-ray powder diffraction. Overall this technique has many advantages and fewer disadvantages, however one must question the use of this technique as a trace analysis tool, due to poor detection at the presence of a substance at 1-5%. The general analytical approach to prove results are reliable beyond reasonable doubt is to use two analytical methods, the first being relatively cheap and quick, but also reliable, then a second test can be used to give unequivocal proof of a compounds presence. Perhaps it can be seen that X-ray powder diffraction would be most suitable for use as a primary test method in smaller sample sizes. X-ray powder diffraction is a useful analytical tool, it can identify many types and forms of substances and is seen to be useful in many situations were unknown substances are recovered. The physics on which the method is based provides a high degree of precision and accuracy in the measurements gained. Overall X-ray Diffraction holds a prominent place in forensic science and can be useful in many cases. 