<heading>Aim:</heading>The aim of this experiment is to determine the composition of a commercially available alcoholic beverage (strongbow) by analysis using the technique of gas chromatography. <heading>Introduction/Background:</heading>The basis of chromatography lies in a seperative process between 2 phases, these being the stationary phase and the mobile phase. The mobile phase, and injected sample flow across the stationary phase, and each component of the sample will be distributed between the two at differing amounts due to their relative affinity for each phase. The distribution ratio is determined by the physical and chemical characteristics of the sample, however it is also affected by operating conditions such as temperature and pressure. Temperature must be carefully selected, as a compromise between elution time and resolution quality. A high temperature is needed to cause vaporization of the volatile liquid however elution time is very fast and resolution is therefore resolution is poor. However lower temperatures cause spreading of the peaks and therefore sensitivity is reduced. Ideally a chromatogram will show a series of separate peaks, each of which corresponds to a component of the injected sample. The sequence of elution corresponds to the retention time of each component upon the stationary phase of the GC column. The area of each peak is related to the concentration of each component and therefore gas chromatography can be used as a quantitative method. <figure/>During the specific process of gas chromatography, a sample is injected into a stream of gas, which is programmed at a specific temperature; usually 50 oC above the boiling point of the least volatile component. The column temperature can then either be kept constant (isothermal) or the temperature can be programmed to progressively increase to improve the separation. The components of the sample will then distribute themselves according to their relative affinities for the stationary phase, and are then recorded and quantified by measuring a physical property. The most common detector to find in a GC system is a flame ionisation detector. <figure/><heading>Method:</heading>To begin a calibration mixture was prepared in triplicate of the following composition: 1000L of 25mg% propan-1-ol internal standard solution and 400L of 80mg% ethanol standard solution; this was taken by micro syringe into clean dry clip top vials which were flowingly capped to prevent loss of ethanol. In an identical manner, a second calibration mixture was prepared in triplicate, this was of the following composition: 1000L of 25mg% propan-1-ol and 400L of 200mg% ethanol solution. Vials were then capped, again to prevent loss of ethanol. A sample of the alcoholic beverage (strongbow) was then prepared. To do this 20mL of the alcoholic beverage was measured and placed into a volumetric flask, this was then degassed using an ultra-sonic bath (for 15minutes). From this degassed sample a solution was prepared in triplicate by pouring the solution into a beaker and taking 2mL of the degassed drink by micro syringe, placing this into a 50mL volumetric flask and diluting to volume with distilled water (dilution factor of 1:25). The samples for analysis were then prepared by taking 1000L of 25mg% propan-1-ol internal standard solution and 400L of the diluted drink (also from a beaker) by micro syringe. These samples were also made up I n triplicate and the vials stoppered to prevent loss of ethanol vapours. Moving on a "Perkin Elmer - auto system, gas chromatograph" was set up to the following parameters: a pressure of 16psi, an injector and detector temperature of 200 oC and a column temperature of 110 oC (isotherm). The carrier gas used was Helium, the column type was a capillary tube composed of fused silicate coated in polyamide being 30m long and 0.25mm in diameter and having a 0.25m film coating inside. Hence the stationary phase is 0.25m in diameter and was composed of carbowax polyethylene glycol base. The detector used in this experiment was a flame ionisation detector (FID). To utilise the gas chromatograph a sample of 1L was taken of each mixture, to do this the sample was taken by syringe plunger, the syringe was filled with the sample mixture 3 times before a sample was injected (to ensure an uncontaminated sample). The sample was then injected through the septum on the top of the instrument, by a swift movement and then the integrator stripped by pressing the "run" button on the chromatograph. The syringe was withdrawn after 3 seconds, and the created chromatogram printed. This process was repeated for all prepared samples. <heading>Results:</heading><table/><table/><heading>Questions:</heading><heading>Briefly explain the mechanisms of the seperative process that is occurring within the column in a GC system. What factors can be altered to affect the separation? </heading>Within a GC column there are two phases, mobile and stationary. Generally in Gas chromatography the stationary phase is composed of a solid (inert) support coated with a liquid phase. The liquid phase is chose after considering the polar characteristics of the analyte. The sample/analyte will be passed across the stationary phase as a component of the mobile phase (a carrier gas), each component in the sample will have a relative attraction/interaction with each phase, this will determine each components retention time on the column. The retention time is determined by the chemical and physical properties of each component and instrumental/method differences. The following factors affect the separation and hence the retention time sof components on the column. Volatility of compound: The more volatile a component, the faster it will travel through the column, and hence the faster its elution time. Polarity of compounds: Polar compounds will travel more slowly especially if the column is also polar, this is due to increased interactions between the analyte and the stationary phase. Column temperature: At higher temperatures sample components will spend most of their time in the gas phase and hence elution time will be quicker. However this means that chromatogram resolution is poor. C olumn packing polarity: Non-polar liquids tend to be non-selective and therefore elution order is determined by the boiling points (volatility) of the components, the lower boiling point components being eluted first. However with polar liquids volatility is not so easily determined due to interactions between the analyte and the stationary phase, hence polar columns tend to show slower elution times but also a larger effect on relative retention times. Flow rate/Pressure of the gas through the column: An increase in either of these factors will provide faster elution times of the sample components. Length of the column: Longer columns will mean a heightened elution time, this in turn also means better separation. <heading>Describe a method by which non-volatile alcohols or carboxylic acids may be analysed by GC. </heading>To analyse compounds, which are non-volatile in nature, chemical derivation is required. Alcohols and Carboxylic acids are low in volatility due to their ability to hydrogen bond, this creates a locked together structure which requires much energy to break. Derivation works to mask the hydrogen bonding, a common way to do this for alcohols and carboxylic acids is to derivitise to an ester. This can be done by the addition of 1M solution of potassium hydroxide in 95 % ethanol (2 mL), refluxed for ~1hour. The solution is then cooled and water (5 mL) is added, following this the mixture is extracted thoroughly with hexane-diethyl ether (1:1, v/v; 3 x 5 mL). The solvent extract is washed with water, dried over anhydrous sodium sulphate and the non-saponifiable materials are recovered on removal of the solvent in a rotary evaporator. The water washings are added to the aqueous layer, which is acidified with 6 M hydrochloric acid and extracted with diethyl ether-hexane (1:1, v/v; 3 x 5 mL). The sample is recovered after washing the extract with water, drying it over anhydrous sodium sulphate and removing the solvent by evaporation.1 <heading>Conclusions</heading>Analysis of our results show there to be a 2.43mg % alcohol content of the commercial alcoholic beverage. The quoted value is of 4mg% , our results may be subject to many experimental errors, such as the injection of our sample, caused by different operators injecting each sample, and errors in pipette use. In addition there may be slight error caused by the computer integration of the peaks produced in the chromatogram. 