<heading>Forest Growth Rates</heading><table/>For this exercise, a reflection coefficient of 0.18 was used, representing a deciduous forest. The growth rate of the forest, derived by multiplying the amount of absorbed solar radiation by the Radiation Use Efficiency (RUE) of the vegetation, was seen to change in response to variations in incoming solar radiation, leaf area index, extinction coefficient and RUE. The effect of changing each of these parameters in isolation, as well as their interaction, is discussed below. <heading>Incoming Solar Radiation (Rn)</heading>When the other parameters under examination remained constant, the growth rate of the forest was seen to have a linear relationship with the amount of incoming solar radiation. A 1% increase in R n produced approximately a 1% increase in growth rate (Table 1) . Monteith (1973) and many others have highlighted the agronomic importance of this relationship and the cumulative amount of solar radiation is often a good indicator of yield. It is worth noting that this phenomenon is a driving force behind the evolution of glasshouse design in protected cropping. In such intensive systems, maximising the amount of Photosynthetically Active Radiation (PAR) reaching the crop allows growers to maximise yields. Some (notably Demetriades-Shah et al, 1992) have also highlighted the over-simplification that this relationship makes. The photosynthetic rate is a function of several soil, environmental and internal biological factors, light intensity being only one of them. (ibid). When considering the yield response to changes in R n, one must also consider the interaction between R n and leaf area index (L). Although not shown in this exercise, an increase in R n without a corresponding increase in L will eventually lead to the leaves becoming "light saturated", This light-response curve (fig. 1) shows that after the point of light saturation, increases in R n have no effect on the rate of photosynthesis (i.e. dry matter production) and may even cause a reduction due to heat stress. <figure/>The data from this exercise would appear within the linear part of the photosynthesis-light response curve, the gradient of the line representing RUE. <heading>Leaf Area Index (L)</heading>This value represents the ratio between the area of leaf for a given area of ground. The values used in this exercise were 3.0 and 6.0. Larger values for L mean that there is a greater area of leaf to intercept the incoming solar radiation, R n, and thus for a given amount of light the level of photosynthesis and dry matter production will initially increase with L. This relationship is not, however linear. When all other variable parameters remained unchanged, a two-fold increase in L produced only a 20-30% increase in the forest growth rate (table 1). This is as a direct result of the exponential relationship between L and the proportion of R n intercepted (Beer's Law). Whilst a denser canopy is able to intercept more light, there will come a point when the lower leaves of the canopy are not receiving high enough levels of light to photosynthesise (Monteith, 1973). These leaves are still respiring and will therefore reduce the net rate of photosynthesis. <heading>Extinction Coefficient (k)</heading>The extinction coefficient represents the factor by which increasing leaf area index (L) increases the proportion of Rn intercepted. The morphology of the leaves within the canopy and the sun's elevation determine the size of k and thus the value will change throughout the year as the sun changes position through the seasons or as leaves change their orientation as they mature. Chartier (1966) in Rosenberg, Blad and Verma (1983) gives the following equation (k is expressed as k c):  FORMULA  where:  FORMULA  The effect on growth rate of changing k depends on the leaf area index. When L=3.0, the effect of a 20% reduction in k was a 10% reduction in growth rate (table 1). However, when L=6.0, the same reduction in k reduced growth rates by only 4% . This demonstrates the exponential relationship between transmission/absorbtion and L i.e. when L is larger and the curve is at a flatter angle, a given change in k will not affect the transmission-interception ratio as much (fig.2). Thus the growth rate was less sensitive to fluctuations in k than fluctuations in other parameters. <figure/>Monteith (1973) stated that horizontally held leaves (high k values) required a leaf area index of only 3 to achieve 95% attenuation of Rn at 1m below the crop canopy whilst those with leaves held near the vertical (lower K values) required L to be nearer 10 to achieve the same interception rate. This is entirely due to differences in the extinction coefficient of the two types of leaf morphology. <heading>Radiation Use Efficiency (RUE)</heading>The RUE is a simple measure of a plant's ability to convert energy from the sun into chemical energy in the bonds of organic molecules (Biomass production). The growth rate can be estimated for a given type of vegetation or crop if the average RUE is known and also the amount of PAR available to the plant. Since the growth rate is the product of these two values, the growth rate and RUE show a positive linear relationship. In a crop situation, however it is worth considering that there are many other factors influencing crop growth. RUE gives some idea of a crop's capability to produce biomass, but where other factors, especially nitrogen availability (Rosati & Dejong, 2002) are limiting, the use of such an oversimplified method of estimating growth may not be useful. <heading>Energy balance of sheltered and exposed crops</heading>Sheltered and open soybean crops showed differing energy balances and rates of water use over the three days (table 2). Where 位E is greater than Rn, and C is negative, the amount of energy used by the plant for evapotranspiration was greater than that received as solar radiation. This energy comes from the air surrounding the plant as heat, as well as directly from the sun and is used to turn liquid water into water vapour (latent heat of evaporation, 位). <table/><heading>Calculating water use:</heading>The amount of water used was calculated as below 位E given as an instantaneous value W m -2 = J m -2 s -1  FORMULA  <heading>a) Effects of shelter on the energy balance of the crop</heading>The sheltered crop consumed less energy for evapotranspiration in all instances. This energy to drive evapotranspiration comes from either solar radiation or from warm air surrounding the plant. Movement of air across the crop allows for greater energy and mass transfer, mixing air from the mass of the atmosphere with the relatively still air directly around the plant. Sheltering the crop would reduce this movement of air across leaf surfaces. The boundary layer immediately surrounding the leaf is a relatively undisturbed area of air, meaning that as water vapour escapes from the stomata, this layer experiences raised levels of humidity. In an unsheltered crop, the movement of the bulk of the air outside this layer, often in the region of 5mm in thickness around a single leaf in a sheltered position (Boulard et al, 2002), facilitates the removal of water vapour through turbulent transfer, reducing the thickness of the boundary layer and reducing aerodynamic resistance (r a). In a stand of vegetation, such as the crop of soybeans in this exercise, there is also a boundary layer of relatively undisturbed air above the crop canopy (Monteith, 1973). Again, mass and energy transfers occur between the vegetation and the bulk of the atmosphere via this layer. Higher windspeeds mean increased turbulent transfer, meaning there is more mixing at the top of this layer, in effect reducing its thickness. This is also apparent in taller, more aerodynamically rough crops, where the opposition to mass transfer, r a, is lower. Where C is a negative value, as has already been established, the flow of energy is from the air to the crop to drive evaporation. This means the air directly surrounding the crop is being cooled and thus its ability to hold water vapour is diminished. In sheltered situations, where heat is not being transferred from the bulk atmosphere to this cooled area of the boundary layer as readily by turbulent transfer, the higher relative humidity (RH) in the proximity of the crop canopy further reduces the rate of evapotranspiration. Rosenberg , Blad and Verma (1983) point out also that reference to Penman and Daltons equations and there susequent permutations, enforces the direct relationship between windspeed and rates of evapotranspiration. <heading>b) Differences in energy balances over the three days</heading>During day 1, the net radiation values were highest During the morning and afternoon measurement periods, for both crops, sensible heat, C was negative, although that for the sheltered crop was only -28 W m -2 between 0800 and 1200 meaning low levels of energy transfer from the crop to the air occurred in this period. During day 2 levels of net radiation were slightly lower, although on this day there was a net warming of the air in the sheltered crop (positive morning values for C and small negative afternoon values) . The open crop still showed similarly elevated levels of energy flow from the crop to the air compared to the sheltered crop, especially in the morning. This suggests that higher levels of evapotranspiration were mainly due to increased windspeed in the open crop in the morning. The total net radiation level on day 3 was approximately half that of day 2. During this day, the levels of 位E and C in the open and the sheltered crops were the most similar. The morning of 17 th July was the only time that C was a positive value for the open crop. The lowest levels of water use also occurred on this day. The data would seem to suggest that the lowest levels of net radiation also coincided with the lowest windspeeds of the trial. Not until the afternoon did both crops begin to use energy from the surrounding air for evapotranspiration, and during this time the rates were similar. This, again suggests that the microclimate of the sheltered crop was not significantly different to that of the open crop. <heading>c) Differences in energy partitioning between morning and afternoon. </heading>Energy used for evapotranspiration in both crops was lower in the morning than in the afternoon. At 0800, when the morning measurements began, the air and the leaves would still have been cool, and possible covered in dew. This means that during the early part of the morning, most of the solar energy and energy transferred from the bulk of the atmosphere by turbulent transfer would heat plant tissues and the cool air surrounding the plants, not drive evapotranspiration. Morning levels of evapotranspiration can also be affected by dew on the leaves of the plant. The contribution of dew as a source of water for evapotranspiration can be considerable depending upon the climatic conditions and type of vegetation (Rosenberg, Blad & Verma, 1983). Where this occurs, the cooling effect on the surrounding air could possibly mean that the warming effects of both the sun and the bulk atmosphere may not be felt so rapidly as the day progresses, especially in the sheltered crop where the layer of cool air around the plant is less quickly removed. The propensity for the air around the plant to be warmer during the night in the open situation (ibid), due to transfer of energy from the greater atmosphere also means that plant and boundary air layer temperatures would have probably been lower in the sheltered crop when measurements commenced at 0800. In both situations, sheltered and open, and on all three days, the amount of energy removed from the air was greater in the afternoon. In the afternoon the air is normally at its warmest and the sun, especially in July, when the data were collected, is likely to be providing considerable net radiation. In sheltered areas, where the amount of turbulent transfer is reduced, the removal of sensible heat is reduced (ibid). During this time, it is likely that air and leaf temperatures will reach their highest levels. The plants need to cool themselves through increased transpiration and even on 17 th July, when R n was at its lowest, C was negative in both the open and sheltered crops in the afternoon. The direct heating effect of incoming solar radiation on a crop means that leaves can become hotter than the air surrounding them. If the rate of evapotranspiration is too high and water loss too rapid, however, plants may invoke a stress response whereby they close the stomata to prevent further water loss. The cooling effect of air movement can therefore be more effective in reducing transpiration than is the wind in decreasing the boundary layer and thus increasing evapotranspiration (Salisbury & Ross, 1992) In these situations, where the dissipation of heat is aided by turbulent transfer, sheltered crops could then possibly show lower growth rates than those in the open field. This is obviously more likely to be problematic for C3 plants. 