<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>The rate and uniformity of germination of non-dormant seeds can be enhanced by "seed priming" before being sown. This pre-sowing treatment is carried out by imbibing seeds in sufficient water so that many metabolic processes could occur, but insufficient water for full germination. By putting seeds in this high moisture content environment for a suitable period, all the viable seeds will be in the verge of germination. When these seeds are finally sown, both the rate and uniformity of germination could be improved. In this experiment, three batches of onion, Allium cepa L. seeds were primed in 3 different osmotic potentials and their germination performances were compared with that of a batch of un-primed seeds control. Evaluation was made about the effect of priming in term of changes in viability, rate of germination and uniformity of germination. <heading>MATERIALS AND METHODS</heading>Four batches of 50 onion seeds were used. Priming treatments were carried out for the first 3 batches of seeds and the forth batch was the untreated control. The level of moisture content in the seeds during priming was controlled by placing seeds in contact with solutions of know osmotic potential. Polyethylene glycol (PEG) was used as osmoticum because it is an inert organic substance of high molecular weight (6000-7000) it would not be absorbed by the seeds or has any toxic effect on them. Three concentrations were used: 299, 341 and 379 g PEG per kg H 2O which are respectively estimated to produce osmotic potentials of - 1.14 MPa, - 1.46 MPa and - 1.79 MPa ( - 1.79 MPa is permanent wilting point for onion) at 20 ˚C (Michel, 1983). Each batch of 50 seeds for priming was treated in a Petri dish on top of 2 circles of Whatman Grade 181 Seed Testing Paper. The paper was moistened by 5 ml of different osmotic potentials PEG solutions. As the seeds were placed on top of the seed testing paper, adequate aeration was ensured. The Petri dishes was then placed in a polythene bag and incubated at 20 ˚C for one week. After one week of priming treatment, the three batches of seeds were rinsed in purified water and dry superficially on absorbent paper before being sprinkled on to another Petri dishes with moistened seeds testing paper for germination tests. The seeds testing paper in these Petri dishes was moistened by 5 ml of purified water. The forth batch of un-primed seeds was also set up for germination test. The four Petri dishes were placed in a polythene bag and incubated at 20 ˚C for germination. Germination counts were carried out at least twice a day for the first 4 days of the germination test and once a day after. Seedlings with 2 mm or longer radicle were counted as germinated or viable and removed from the Petri at each count. The effect of priming was evaluated by comparing the values of mean germination period, mean rate of germination and variance of germination periods between different priming treatments and the control seeds. The germination count raw data and details of calculation of mean germination period, mean rate of germination and variance are in the Appendix. <heading>RESULTS</heading>Most primed seeds from different osmotic potentials germinated at least 1 day earlier than the un-primed seeds control (Figure 1). However, in this experiment, about 4% of the - 1.14 MPa primed seeds had already germinated during the priming treatment. There was only a slight decrease, at most 8%, in viability when compare primed seeds with un-primed seeds (Figure 2) and this seems to suggest priming probably did not damage most of the onion seeds. There were considerable increases in the mean rate of germination in primed seeds and the results in Figure 3 show there seem to be some positive proportional relationship between priming osmotic potential and mean rate of germination. If mean rate of germination is the indication of vigour in the seeds, the results of this experiment seems to suggest priming did invigorate onion seeds. Also, the variance of germination periods (Figure 4) suggests priming would make germination more uniform, although there was no improvement from - 1.46 MPa to - 1.14 MPa in this experiment. <figure/><figure/><figure/><figure/><heading>DISCUSSION</heading>As there was only one batch of seeds (one sample) for each treatment and control in this experiment, no statistical analysis can be carried out and therefore there was no statistical evidence to support any assertion from this experiment. More replicated samples were needed for this experiment if the beneficial effects in priming were to be proved. The slight decrease in viability in the primed seeds was mainly due to fungi attack during priming treatments. If the priming processes were to carry out in sterilised environments, there might be an even smaller decrease or no decrease in viability when compare with the un-primed seeds. As seedlings with 2 mm or longer radicle were counted as viable, and germination tests on them were not continued, there was no way of telling whether they were normal seedling or abnormal seedlings. Although priming did not seem to have detrimental effect on onion seeds up to the stage of redicle emergent, this experiment failed to test whether priming had any damaging effects on later stages of development. In this experiment tests were only carried out in small amount of seeds, PEG might not be the most suitable osmoticum to use when large number of seeds were to be primed in an agri-industrial scale, as oxygen might not be able to diffuse easily through thick layer of PEG solution. An alternative osmoticum or priming method is needed for large scale of priming treatment. As around 4% of seeds had already germinated during priming treatment in - 1.14 MPa osmotic potential and there were no obvious improvement in uniformity in germination comparing with - 1.46 MPa (Figure 4), the optimum priming osmotic potential may be some where between - 1.14 and - 1.46 MPa. When seeds are wet after priming, they are difficult to handle for sowing in the field, and for practical propose, seeds might need to be dried after priming treatment before being sown. In this experiment the effects of priming followed by drying were not tested. Another experiment combines the effect of priming and drying might be needed. 