<heading>INTRODUCTION</heading>Both Macrochloa tenacissima and Lygeum spartum are widespread perennial tussock grass in semi-arid southern Spain. Although they appear in the same geographical region, the two species generally grow in different sites. L. spartum is thought to be more salt tolerance than M. tenacissima (Freitag 1971) and they appear to grow in different ecological niches and soil salinity is the putative factor that determines which species is more dominance in a particular site. This project is to investigate whether soil salinity is a determining factor for both M. tenacissima and L. spartum population size and area of coverage at a specific location, and which species, M. tenacissima or L. spartum are better adapted to a high level of salt in soil. <heading>FIELD SITE AND METHODS</heading>A site was chosen in a valley near La Joya, just over 1 km south of Las Negras (see the attached map). The site is relatively flat that makes access and survey easier and it has a mix population of M. tenacissima and L. spartum. The soil is calcareous alkaline and the altitude of the site is some where between 50 to 100 m above sea level and about 100 m from the coast. Survey was carried out on twenty (5 rows by 4 columns) 5x5 square-meter quadrats. The orientation of the quadrats is shown in Figure 1 and micro-relief of the area was estimated by eyes (Figure 2). For each quadrat, the number of individual M. tenacissima and L. spartum were counted, height of some of the plants were measured and percentage of area coverage of both species as well as bare soil area were estimated. Two soil samples were taken in two opposite corners for each quadrat. <figure/><figure/>As some M. tenacissima and L. spartum plants were not in flower during the survey, this made the job of identification more difficult and guideline in Table 1 were drawn up to aid identification. However, there were a few plants that were too small to identify and they were ignored in the survey. <table/><figure/>In order to obtain the salinity data of the soil samples, we need to have information about soil moisture content of the samples. To measure soil moisture content, samples of around 50 g of weighted moist soil were put in the oven at 60 ˚C over night (approximately 12 hours) and the dry soil samples were weighted again. The different in weight between the moist soil sample and dry soil sample is the water content in the soil. For the soil salt content, 10.0 g of moist soil samples were mixed with 50 ml of de-ionized water to dissolve the salt from the soil sample into the water, a Primo conductivity meter was used to measure the soil steeped water conductivity. Detail of procedure of salinity calculation is in Appendix 2. <heading>RESUTLS</heading><heading>Quadrat Salinity</heading>The variation of salinity between quadrats appears to be small, however, in quadrat C4, D2 and D3, the two soil samples within the same quadrat seem to have substantially different salt levels and this lead to rather big standard errors of salinity in these quadrats (Graph 1 and Table A2.2 in Appendix 2). Correlation Between M. tenacissima and L. spartum Population and Soil Salinity There seems to be some correlation between soil salinity and the number of M. tenacissima and L. spartum within a quadrat (Graph 2). The general trend from Graph 2 seems to suggest that L. spartum is the dominance species in high salinity site whereas M. tenacissima favours less salty area. However, the result is slightly different if we plot percentage of plant area coverage against soil salinity (Graph 3). L. spartum roughly remains the same (not going up) percentage of coverage from low to high salinity sites, but M. tenacissima coverage area decrease as salt level increases and this decrease in coverage area correlate to the decrease number of M. tenacissima. The effect of high salinity can also be seen on other vegetation, as the percentage of bare soil increase with the increase level of salt in soil (Graph 4). <heading>Two-sample t-test</heading>Each quadrat is categorized as either high salt level if the mean salinity level is above 0.25 g / kg of dry soil, or low salt level if it is below 0.2 g / kg of dry soil or undeterminable if the salt level is between 0.2 to 0.25 g / kg of dry soil (Table 2). Data from the quadrats with undeterminable salt level are ignored in the subsequence two-sample t-tests. Two-sample t-tests were carried out using statistical program Minitab to compare within a species, either M. tenacissima or L. spartum, if there are any significant different between the means of plant number in high and low salinity quadrats. The same t-tests also apply for percentage area coverage of plant in high and low salt levels of quadrats. <table/>Two-sample t-test results show only M. tenacissima has sigificant different in the mean value of plant number and percentage of area coverage between high salinity site and low salinity site (Table 3). This seems to suggest salt level only affect M. tenacissima but not L. spartum and this seems to be in contradiction with the result in Graph 2 (more L. spartum in high salinity site). <table/><heading>DISCUSSION</heading>The salt measure method in this experiment is only approximate as other ions would be present in the soil, (e.g. potassium, nitrate, phosphate and sulfate ions) and they could affect the overall conductivity in the soil steeped water and give a higher reading in the conductivity meter than it would be if sodium and chloride were the only ions in the water. The calculated salinity values could be over estimated. Also, as there seems to be little variation in salinity between quadrats (Graph 1), but substantial variation in salt level between soil samples within some quadrats (e.g. C4, D2 and D3), it would be better if more soil samples were taken from each quadrats as getting accurate salinity data is very important for this project for all the results and interpretation of them are based on the salinity values, however, due to constraint in resources (time and equipment), this was not possible. It also might be better if more than one site was surveyed, as this might lead to bigger variation in soil salinity and more drastic changes in plants population and coverage. When there were no flowers or florescence on the plants, it was very difficult to distinguish between M. tenacissima and L. spartum and misidentification could very easily be made. Plants that were too small to identify were ignored. All these could introduce error in the survey data. Also, percentage of coverage was estimated by eyes and this could be very subjective. In order to be more consistent, coverage estimation was done by the same person through out the project. Even counting number of plants could run into problem, sometime it was difficult to tell how many plants were there in a large clump, where did an individual plant start and end? There appears to be no correlation between plant number and percentage of area coverage for L. spartum (see Graph 2 and 3, plant number goes up in high salinity but percentage of coverage goes down). This could be due to the size of L. spartum become smaller in high salt level site. Which data, plant number or percentage of area coverage, to use as an indication of population changes can be difficult to decide. As in this case, they can give a very different picture. t-test results show there appears to be no significant different in number of plant or area of coverage between high salinity site and low salinity site for L. spartum, despite there seem to be an increase in number of plant in high salt level area (Graph 2). This apparent contradiction could be due to high variation in the number of L. spartum plants between quadrats and this gives a bigger spread in the standard error and lead to higher P-values in the t-test. However, caution must be taken for all the t-test results, as the categorized of quadrats into high or low salt levels is based on salinity data of each quadrat and we saw that these salinity values are subjected to a lot of possible error (see Graph 1). Moisture content in the soil could be another factor that determine which species is more dominant in a particular area. Number of L. spartum seems to increase with moisture content in soil (Graph 5), however, this increase in population does not seem to reflect in the percentage of area coverage (Graph 6). To conclude, M. tenacissima seem to be less salt tolerance and their population (in term of plant number or area coverage) seem to be affected more by salt level in soil than L. spartum. Salt could be the determining factor for M. tenacissima distribution in a site. However, salt level seems to have little effect on L. spartum and other soil factors may be the determining factor for their distribution. 